Hilary Term

[2017] UKSC 26

On appeal from: [2015] EWCA Civ 832

 

 

 

JUDGMENT

 

 

Volkswagen Financial Services (UK) Ltd (Respondent) v Commissioners for Her 
Majestys Revenue and Customs (Appellant)

 

before

 

Lord Neuberger, President

Lord Kerr

Lord Reed

Lord Carnwath

Lord Gill (Scotland)

 

 

 

JUDGMENT GIVEN ON

 

 

5 April 2017

 

 

Heard on 3 November 2016

 

 

Appellant

Owain Thomas QC

Amy Mannion

(Instructed by HM Revenue and Customs Solicitors Office)

 

Respondent

Nicola Shaw QC

Michael Jones

(Instructed by KPMG LLP (UK))

 

 

 

LORD CARNWATH: (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Kerr, Lord Reed and Lord 
Gill agree)

1.                   The respondent (VWFS) is a member of the Volkswagen 
Group, and is used (through its retail sector) to provide hire purchase 
(HP) finance for the sale of vehicles manufactured by the group. When a 
customer of a VW dealership wishes to purchase a vehicle using finance from 
VWFS, the vehicle is acquired by VWFS as part of the finance arrangements 
from the dealer and then supplied by it to the customer on deferred payment 
terms under an HP contract. The vehicles are sold on to the customer at the 
same price as they are purchased from the dealer.

2.                   This appeal is concerned with the treatment of general 
business overheads, not directly attributable to particular supplies. The 
legal and factual background is set out in detail in the judgment of Patten 
LJ and need not be repeated. As he explained the issue arises in the 
context of a so-called partial exemption special method (PESM) agreed 
with HMRC for the valuation of the proportion of residual input tax 
attributable to HP transactions. The issue is whether any of the residual 
input tax paid by VWFS in respect of such general overheads (so far as 
apportioned to the retail sector) is deductible against the output tax paid 
on the taxable supply of vehicles to customers. HMRCs primary contention 
is that the overheads are all attributable to the exempt supplies of 
finance and the input tax is therefore irrecoverable. VWFS contends that 
the residual input tax should be split in proportion to the ratio of 
taxable transactions to the whole, which has the effect of splitting the 
residual input tax 50/50 for HP transactions. That issue was decided in 
favour of VWFS by the First-tier Tribunal (FTT), and by the Court of 
Appeal, although the Upper Tribunal had supported HMRCs approach.

3.                   That remains the main issue in the appeal, but is one 
on which the court has decided that a reference to the CJEU is necessary to 
reach a conclusion. The present judgment is concerned with a secondary 
issue. Mr Thomas argues that HMRC had a fall-back position on the amount of 
the apportionment, which the FTT had failed to consider. As Patten LJ 
explained:

        The First-tier Tribunal proceeded on the basis that the only
       dispute about methodology was whether any part of the residual input
       tax was attributable to and could be set-off against the taxable
       supplies of vehicles made in the retail sector of VWFSs business.
       But HMRC contend that they did challenge the apportionment formula
       contained in the proposed PESM on wider grounds and that a lower
       figure than 50% should be attributed to the taxable supplies of
       vehicles as part of the hire purchase contracts in terms of the use
       made of the allocated inputs. (para 13)

4.                   Patten LJ expressed some surprise (which I share) 
that, in an appeal where both sides were represented by experienced 
counsel, such an issue had not been capable of resolution by agreement 
between them, or by reference to their written submissions or notes of the 
hearing. However, the court had been asked to resolve the issue on the 
available material. That included:

i)                   HMRCs skeleton argument before the tribunal which had 
described the issue as being whether VWFS method produces a fair and 
reasonable attribution of residual input tax in the retail sector, but 
without putting forward a positive alternative to HMRCs preferred 
methodology, or suggesting a different apportionment.

ii)                HMRC had relied upon two witness statements made by Mr 
Jonathan Cannon, the second of which commented on the differences between 
the two approaches. He observed that VWFSs approach was realistic, 
perhaps more so than the HMRCs approach, but was open to two particular 
concerns, which he identified. Again he did not put forward an alternative 
apportionment.

iii)              Judge Berners notes of the hearing recorded the 
following submission made by Mr Thomas:

       [The] value of the car does not bear on the use of overheads. What
       [VWFS] says is [that] if [that is done] it would be 80%, but 50% is
       fair. But why? The appellant does not say. 50% is an arbitrary
       selection of a figure. No analysis has been put forward. [This]
       comes from the weighting exercise. HP contracts [are] treated as two
       transactions. [It is] wholly unexplained as [to] why it is fair to
       treat HP [transactions] 1:1. Why not another fraction?

5.                   The Upper Tribunal (para 103) saw this extract as 
supporting Mr Thomass submission that he had asked the FTT to consider in 
the alternative whether a lesser figure than 50% should have been 
attributed to the taxable supplies. Patten LJ thought otherwise:

       But my own reading of the judges notes on these issues is that Mr
       Thomas was challenging the basis of the 50% attribution as arbitrary
       in the context, as Ms Shaw has submitted, of an argument that any
       attribution was impermissible. HMRC did not rely upon some
       alternative methodology which attributed to the use of the residual
       inputs by the taxable supply of vehicles a figure somewhere between
       1% and 50%. I do not see how this court is in the position to
       gainsay Judge Berners understanding of the parties position on the
       appeals which the FTT heard and none of the materials we have been
       asked to look at demonstrate that the FTT misunderstood HMRCs
       case. (para 71)

6.                   In this court Mr Thomas submits that the Court of 
Appeal failed to take account of the nature of the appeal to the tribunal, 
which allows the FTT to consider both issues of principle and the amount of 
the assessment. He relies on words of mine in Pegasus Birds Ltd v Revenue 
and Customs and Excise Comrs [2004] EWCA Civ 1015; [2004] STC 1509:

       The Tribunal should remember that its primary task is to find the
       correct amount of tax, so far as possible on the material properly
       available to it, the burden resting on the taxpayer. In all but very
       exceptional cases, that should be the focus of the hearing  (para
       38(i))

He relies also on Banbury Visionplus Ltd v Her Majestys Revenue and 
Customs [2006] EWHC 1024; [2006] STC 1568 para 48, where in a similar 
context to the present Etherton J held that there was nothing to exclude 
the jurisdiction of the tribunal to decide whether a particular method 
would achieve the statutory objective. Miss Shaw submits that those cases 
do not detract from the general principle that proceedings before the 
tribunal are not inquisitorial in nature; it is no part of the tribunals 
role to undertake a roving review of the dispute of its own motion. She 
relies on comments of Forbes J as to the adversarial nature of proceedings 
before the former VAT Tribunal (Tynewydd Labour Working Mens Club and 
Institute Ltd v Customs and Excise Comrs [1979] STC 570, 580).

7.                   In my view, this issue does not require examination of 
general questions about the tribunals role. One of the strengths of the 
new tribunal system is the flexibility of its procedures, which need to be 
and can be adapted to a wide range of types of case and of litigant. In 
some areas, particularly those involving litigants in person, a more 
inquisitorial role may be appropriate. However, when the tribunal as here 
is dealing with substantial litigants, represented by experienced counsel, 
it is entitled to assume that the parties will have identified with some 
care what they regard as relevant issues for decision. My comments in 
Pegasus Birds should not be taken as indicating anything different. They 
were not of general application, but intended (as the following words made 
clear) to discourage undue attention to the Commissioners original 
exercise of best judgment, as opposed to the correctness of the result.

8.                   Like Patten LJ, I would attach particular importance 
to the tribunals understanding of the issue before it. This is apparent 
from the tribunals own introduction to the detailed discussion. Having 
described the main issue, the tribunal continued:

       That is the full extent of the dispute. Other aspects of what
       amounts to a fair and reasonable attribution, such as ease of audit
       and operation, are not at issue. Nor, although the Tribunal itself
       asked for clarification, is the 50/50 weighting that VWFS proposes
       as between the taxable supplies of the vehicle and the exempt
       supplies of finance under the HP agreements. The evidence of Mr
       Cannan for HMRC shows that the weighting is accepted as realistic;
       indeed he concedes that it may be more realistic than that adopted
       by HMRCs method. The dispute is not on the weighting, but on
       whether any part of the residual input tax should be attributed at
       all to the taxable supply of the vehicle. (para 41, emphasis added)

9.                   I agree with Patten LJ that we have no material which 
could justify going behind that clear statement of the position as the 
tribunal understood it, having itself apparently sought clarification. Mr 
Thomas says that he has no recollection of such a request. However, if 
there was any doubt about that, the time to have dealt with it was when the 
decision was received. If the tribunal was thought to have misunderstood 
HMRCs position, and failed to deal with a significant issue, the matter 
could have been raised with them and sorted out then and there, at a time 
when it was fresh in the minds of all involved. As it is the tribunals 
understanding seems to me entirely consistent with the lack of any specific 
reference to this issue in their written submissions or the evidence of 
their witness. I agree with Patten LJ that the passing reference in the 
note of cross-examination adds nothing.

10.              For these reasons, in agreement with the Court of Appeal, 
I would dismiss this ground of appeal.