Trinity Term

[2017] UKSC 50

On appeal from: [2015] UKSC 25

 

 

 

JUDGMENT

 

 

R (on the application of Hemming (t/a Simply Pleasure Ltd) and others) 
(Respondents) v Westminster City Council (Appellant)

 

 

before

 

Lord Neuberger, President

Lord Mance

Lord Clarke

Lord Reed

Lord Toulson

 

 

 

JUDGMENT GIVEN ON

 

 

19 July 2017

 

 

Heard on 11 May 2017

 

 

Appellant

David Matthias QC

Charles Streeten

(Instructed by Westminster City Council Legal Services)

 

Respondents

Philip Kolvin QC

Victoria Wakefield

Tim Johnston

(Instructed by Gosschalks)

 

 

 

LORD MANCE: (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Reed and Lord Hughes agree)

1.                   This is a sequel to the Supreme Courts previous 
judgment dated 29 April [2015] UKSC 25; [2015] AC 1600. It is written with 
the benefit of the Court of Justices answer dated 16 November 2016 ((Case 
C-316/15) [2017] PTSR 325) to the question which that judgment referred to 
the Court of Justice. The appeal concerns fees which were charged to the 
respondents on applying to Westminster City Council for sex shop licences 
for the three years ended 31 January 2011, 2012 and 2013 and which included 
the councils costs of enforcing the licensing scheme against unlicensed 
third parties running sex shops (enforcement costs). The respondents 
applications all in the event succeeded, and I can call them the licence 
holders.

2.                   Under domestic law the basis for charging such fees 
was and is found in paragraph 19 of Schedule 3 to the Local Government 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 as amended by the Policing and Crime 
Act 2009, section 27(7), reading:

       An applicant for the grant, renewal, variation or transfer of a
       licence under this Schedule shall pay a reasonable fee determined by
       the appropriate authority.

In respect of all years ending on 31 January up to 2010, Westminster City 
Council was entitled to determine a reasonable fee which included 
enforcement costs, and to require this to be paid on application for a sex 
shop licence, subject to refunding of the part relating to enforcement 
costs, if the application was not granted: see paras 6-7 of our previous 
judgment.

3.                   The position however changed with the coming into 
force in the United Kingdom with effect from 28 December 2009 of the 
Provision of Services Regulations 2009 (SI 2009/2999), giving effect 
domestically to EU Directive 2006/123/EC. The courts below held that, after 
this change, the only legitimate charges which Westminster City Council 
could levy related to the administrative costs of processing the relevant 
applications and monitoring compliance with the terms of the licence by 
licence holders (which I can call processing costs): see Court of Appeal 
judgment dated 24 May 2013 [2013] EWCA Civ 591; [2013] PTSR 1377, para 130. 
The council was not entitled to levy the (considerably larger) parts of the 
actual charges which related to the costs of enforcing the scheme against 
non-licence holders.

4.                   On that basis, the Court of Appeal ordered Westminster 
City Council to determine a reasonable fee excluding enforcement costs for 
each of the years ended 31 January 2011 and 2012, and to determine afresh 
a reasonable fee excluding enforcement costs for the year ended 31 January 
2013. The distinction between determining, in the first two years, and 
determining afresh, in the third year, arose because the issues before 
Keith J [2012] EWHC 1260 (Admin); [2012] PTSR 1676 covered all years ending 
31 January 2007 onwards, and he held by his judgment dated 16 May 2012 that 
the councils Licensing Sub-Committee had failed to determine any yearly 
fee after 7 September 2004 (when it determined the fee for the year ended 
31 January 2005 and no more) until 5 January 2012 (when it determined the 
fee for the year ended 31 January 2013). All that had happened in the 
intervening years was that the councils officers had simply assumed that 
the same fee as set on 7 September 2004 continued to apply and had charged 
licence applicants accordingly.

5.                   Pursuant to the Court of Appeals order, Westminster 
City Council made corresponding repayments totalling £1,189,466 to the 
licence holders on 28 June 2013, together, it appears, with a further 
£227,779.15 paid by mistake (since it related to licence holders not party 
to the present proceedings).

6.                   In our previous judgment, we took a different view 
from the courts below about the effect of the change worked by the 2009 
Regulations giving effect to the EU Directive. We drew a distinction 
between two types of licensing scheme, at para 18 as follows:

       Type A: Applications for licences are made on terms that the
       applicant must pay:

           (i)        on making the application, the costs of the
           authorisation procedures and formalities, and

           (ii)       on the application being successful, a further fee to
           cover the costs of the running and enforcement of the licensing
           scheme.

       Type B: Applications for licences are made on terms that the
       applicant must pay:

           (i)        on making the application, the costs of the
           authorisation procedures and formalities,

           (ii)       at the same time, but on the basis that it is
           refundable if the application is unsuccessful, a further fee to
           cover the costs of the running and enforcement of the licensing
           scheme.

7.                   We held that, both under domestic law (paragraph 19 of 
Schedule 3 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982) and 
by reference to EU law (Directive 2006/123/EC, implemented domestically by 
the Provision of Services Regulations 2009), Westminster City Council was 
entitled to operate a scheme of type A in relation to the licensing of sex 
shops. We referred to the Court of Justice the question whether it was 
entitled to operate a scheme of type B. The Court of Justice has answered 
that question in the negative, on the basis that a requirement to pay a fee 
to cover the costs of running the licensing scheme and enforcing it against 
unlicensed operators, refundable if the application for a licence fails, 
constitutes an illegitimate charge in respect of the procedure for 
authorisation.

8.                   In the above circumstances, and despite the Court of 
Justices answer in respect of type B, Westminster City Council submits 
that it is entitled to be paid or repaid the sums which it repaid to sex 
shop licence holders on 28 June 2013, following the Court of Appeals 
order. The licence holders, on the other hand, submit that they are 
entitled to retain the repayment made to them in full, because it was 
charged in a way for which there was no warrant. The submissions on each 
side were complicated by reference to principles of unjust enrichment under 
both domestic and European law, in the latter case including the Court of 
Justice judgment in Lady & Kid A/S v Skatteministeriet (Case C-398/09) 
[2012] All ER (EC) 410, [2011] EUECJ C-398/09, although I note in 
parenthesis that it may be significant that this related to tax, rather 
than a fee for a service.

9.                   In my view, the correct analysis is simpler than some 
of the submissions made would suggest. The scheme which the council 
operated was only defective in so far as it required payment up front at 
the time of the application. Its invalidity was limited. Contrary to the 
respondents case, European law permits a fee to cover the costs of running 
and enforcing the licensing scheme becoming due upon the grant of a 
licence. There is no imperative under European law, as incorporated 
domestically by the 2009 Regulations, to treat the whole scheme as invalid, 
rather than to invalidate it to the extent of the inconsistency: see 
Edward and Lane on European Union Law (2013), para 6.16. Even under purely 
domestic law principles, a test of substantial severability is appropriate, 
rather than a rigid insistence on textual severability: see eg Director of 
Public Prosecutions v Hutchinson [1990] 2 AC 783, 811D-G and 813E-G. Any 
remaining element of the scheme which can stand by itself is able to do so.

10.              Here, the council was entitled to set and to require 
payment of a fee including enforcement costs as well as processing costs 
applicable to all those who, like the licence holders, actually received 
licences and benefitted by the councils enforcement action. Although it 
was wrong to charge the element of this fee relating to enforcement costs 
conditionally at the time of any licence application, this element was 
under the scheme due unconditionally once a licence was granted. As we said 
in our previous judgment (para 23): When the application succeeds, the 
payment made becomes due unconditionally.

11.              Even if this were not the right analysis, nothing in the 
course of events to date can have affected paragraph 19 of Schedule 3 to 
the 1982 Act, or the councils right to determine a proper fee under it. 
Even if there might hypothetically be an exceptional case in which lapse of 
time and intervening circumstances might make it oppressive to set such a 
fee, there is no ground to put this case into that category.

12.              It follows that, in so far as the council has determined a 
reasonable fee, including enforcement costs, there is no answer to the 
councils claim to be paid or repaid it now. Before Keith J, it was the 
licence holders case that, if the court concluded that a fee determined by 
the council (whether or not it could legitimately include enforcement 
costs) was unreasonable, the fee would have to be remitted to the council 
for re-determination of a reasonable fee. Before the Supreme Court, 
however, the parties have agreed that any such re-determination should be 
undertaken by a judge of the Administrative Court.

13.              The parties are however at odds as to whether there have 
been any relevant determinations in respect of the three years ending 31 
January 2011, 2012 and 2013, which are now before the Supreme Court. As to 
this, the position is clear in respect of the third year, ended 31 January 
2013. The parties are bound by Keith Js finding that the council did on 5 
January 2012 determine fees of £19,973.00 for a new sex shop licence and of 
£18,737.00 for renewal of a sex shop licence for the year from 1 February 
2012 to 31 January 2013. Both these sums covered enforcement costs. Hence, 
when the Court of Appeal came to make its order in the light of its 
conclusion that the council could not on any basis recover enforcement 
costs from licence holders, it ordered the council to determine afresh 
the appropriate fees for the year ended 31 January 2013. This the council 
did by eliminating and repaying the enforcement costs. The position is now 
reversed, and the council is entitled to recover these enforcement costs, 
subject to corresponding reduction if and to the extent that the 
Administrative Court determines the enforcement costs determined to have 
been unreasonable.

14.              The position in respect of the two earlier years, ending 
31 January 2011 and 2012 is slightly more complex. The council failed from 
5 September 2004 until 5 January 2012 to determine annual fees for any of 
the years ended 31 January 2006 to 31 January 2012; and, when it was 
ordered to do so by Keith J and the Court of Appeal retrospectively in 
relation to the two years ended 31 January 2011 and 2012, it was ordered, 
and so did so, on the basis that enforcement costs should be excluded. In 
the light of the Supreme Courts judgment, that order was incorrect, and 
the council could and should have been ordered to determine a fee in 
relation to those two years which included enforcement costs, just as it 
was in relation to the prior years before the EU law change on 28 December 
2009.

15.              The council in response would, I understand, say that it 
did in effect determine a fee including enforcement costs, when, pursuant 
to the Court of Appeals order, it analysed the amounts which it had in 
fact charged for the years ended 31 January 2011 and 2012, determined the 
amount referable to enforcement costs included therein and approved a fee 
excluding that amount. It may also be able to suggest that fees for these 
years have been determined at some other point or points in time. Any such 
submission can be left for the Administrative Court to consider if it has 
any significance. For my part, it is sufficient to say that, even if any 
such submission be rejected, the council must now clearly be put in the 
same position as it would have been, if the Court of Appeal had reached the 
same conclusion as the Supreme Court. In that event, the Court of Appeal 
would have ordered a determination of a fee for each year which included 
enforcement costs and it would not have ordered repayment of the element of 
enforcement costs as it did. As a matter of obvious justice, the Supreme 
Court must be able to restore the parties to the position they should have 
been in, by now ordering repayment by the licence holders of the 
enforcement costs, to the extent that they meet the criterion of 
reasonableness. The issue potentially remaining on this basis is the 
reasonableness of the sum identified as enforcement costs, and now to be 
repaid to the council. This issue should be remitted, as agreed, to the 
Administrative Court.

16.              Mr Kolvin QC for the licence holders submits that there 
are other matters which should also go back to the Administrative Court. 
The first two appear to go to the account prepared by the council in 2013 
following the Court of Appeals judgment, which account was not the subject 
of any challenge before the Supreme Court, other than by reference to the 
issue indicated in para 8 of this judgment. Whether that account has been 
properly prepared in these two respects can nevertheless be appropriately 
remitted to the Administrative Court.

17.              The first matter relates to a surplus of £116,520 shown, 
according to figures said to have been produced to Keith J, as arising from 
a difference between the total income from licences and the total cost of 
the licensing regime in the year ended 31 January 2005. The licence holders 
submit that it was a breach of the Court of Appeals order not to bring any 
such surplus into account, since para 2 of that order refers to the need 
to bring into account any previous surpluses or deficits when determining 
a reasonable fee for the year ended 31 January 2011. It is not clear to me 
that this contemplates going back as far as a year ended 31 January 2005, 
since Keith Js order dated 17 July 2012 only refers to the need to carry 
forward from year to year any previous surpluses or deficits from each of 
the said years ending 31 January 2007 onwards, those being the only years 
which it appears were in issue before him. Any issues about the licence 
holders right to raise this point as well as about its merits should be 
remitted to the Administrative Court.

18.              A second matter raised is that the council failed fully to 
account for some £80,611 of income received when calculating fees, and so 
accounting for profits, in respect of the years ended 31 January 2010 and 
2011. Again, the admissibility and merits of this issue should be remitted 
to the Administrative Court.

19.              A third point was raised in oral submissions by Mr Kolvin. 
It related to interest which should, he submitted, be allowed on council 
surpluses in relation to sex shop licensing totalling £207,869 in respect 
of the years ended 31 January 2006 to 31 January 2010. The order made by 
Keith J contained a specific paragraph, number (7), dealing with interest 
on any excess repayable in respect of the years ending 31 January 2007 to 
31 January 2010. The Administrative Court can no doubt consider what 
interest is due under that paragraph and whether it has been paid or 
accounted for. I do not at present see any basis for any further claim for 
interest on any earlier year or years, and the appeal to this court 
certainly did not involve any such claim. But it will be open to the 
Administrative Court to consider whether any such further claim falls 
within the scope of any of the issues which are open or orders which have 
been made in the present proceedings.

20.              Finally, Mr Kolvin emphasised that some of the licence 
holders party to these proceedings are no longer in existence or in 
business, and that any payment or repayment which has to be made by licence 
holders under this judgment must be according to the pro rata sums actually 
received by each licence holder. That is, I understand, common ground.

21.              Lord Toulson, who sadly died before this judgment was 
handed down, had indicated agreement both with its essential reasoning and 
with the conclusions reached in it.

22.              The parties should liaise with the Registrar with regard 
to an appropriate form of order to give effect to this and the courts 
previous judgments, the detailed working out of which, together with the 
claim to recover the £227,779.15 allegedly paid by mistake as mentioned in 
para 5 above and the matters identified in paras 14 to 18 above, will be 
remitted to the Administrative Court. The parties will be at liberty to 
make submissions in writing on costs.