Hilary Term

[2017] UKSC 21

On appeal from: [2013] EWCA Civ 1513

 

 

 

JUDGMENT

 

 

BPE Solicitors and another (Respondents) v Hughes-Holland (in substitution 
for Gabriel) (Appellant)

 

before

 

Lord Neuberger, President

Lord Mance

Lord Clarke

Lord Sumption

Lord Hodge

 

 

 

JUDGMENT GIVEN ON

 

 

22 March 2017

 

 

Heard on 14 and 15 December 2016

 

 

Appellant

David Halpern QC

Adam Chichester-Clark

(Instructed by Roose + Partners)

 

Respondents

Roger Stewart QC

Scott Allen

(Instructed by Beale & Company Solicitors LLP)

 

 

LORD SUMPTION: (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Mance, Lord Clarke and Lord 
Hodge agree)

1.                   The issue on this appeal is, in summary, what damages 
are recoverable in a case where (i) but for the negligence of a 
professional adviser his client would not have embarked on some course of 
action, but (ii) part or all of the loss which he suffered by doing so 
arose from risks which it was no part of the advisers duty to protect his 
client against. The problem may be illustrated by one of the most 
celebrated legal parables of modern times, the story of the mountaineers 
knee devised by Lord Hoffmann in the course of argument in South Australia 
Asset Management Corpn v York Montague Ltd [1997] AC 191, at p 213:

       A mountaineer about to undertake a difficult climb is concerned
       about the fitness of his knee. He goes to a doctor who negligently
       makes a superficial examination and pronounces the knee fit. The
       climber goes on the expedition, which he would not have undertaken
       if the doctor had told him the true state of his knee. He suffers an
       injury which is an entirely foreseeable consequence of
       mountaineering but has nothing to do with his knee.



Like all parables, this one over-simplifies the issue and will not bear too 
much analysis. But it serves the purpose which its author intended, of 
introducing one of the main dilemmas of the law of damages.

The facts

2.                   Mr Richard Gabriel was adjudicated bankrupt in March 
2014 and the present appeal is brought by his trustee in bankruptcy, Mr 
Peter Hughes-Holland. The appeal arises out of events in the days of his 
prosperity, when he was a semi-retired businessman with money to invest. 
The Judge described him as astute, a hard-headed businessman and 
undoubtedly knowledgeable in the field of property and generally 
conversant with property dealing.

3.                   Mr Peter Little was a builder and developer. He 
operated mainly through a company called High Tech Fabric Maintenance Ltd, 
which he owned and controlled. Until the events now to be described, Mr 
Little was a personal friend of Mr Gabriel.

4.                   In November 2007, the two men met in a pub. Mr Little 
told him that he was looking to borrow £200,000 in connection with a 
disused heating tower situated on Kemble Airfield in Gloucestershire, 
called Building 428. Mr Little gave Mr Gabriel to understand that the 
property belonged to him or at any rate to a company which he controlled. 
He said that planning permission had been granted for the development of 
the building as offices. He put forward a figure of about £200,000 for 
development costs, on the basis that he would do the building work himself 
using relatively inexpensive construction methods. Although Mr Little did 
not say so in terms, Mr Gabriel assumed that the £200,000 would be used to 
finance the development. After the meeting, Mr Gabriel visited the site, 
and formed the view that Building 428 was worth about £150,000 and that 
once developed it would be worth more than £400,000. Taking Mr Littles 
estimate of development costs at face value, he decided that the project 
was viable and that he would lend the £200,000 that Mr Little needed.

5.                   From the outset, Mr Littles intentions differed from 
the assumptions of Mr Gabriel. In the light of the Judges findings, this 
must be regarded as a misunderstanding. Building 428 belonged to High Tech, 
subject to a charge in favour of a bank which secured a loan of £150,000. 
Mr Little intended to transfer it to a special purpose vehicle called 
Whiteshore Associates Ltd, which was to be used to carry out the 
development. Whiteshore was to pay £150,000 to High Tech for the building, 
which would be paid over to the bank in discharge of the loan and the 
charge. The purchase by Whiteshore was to be funded from the £200,000 
borrowed from Mr Gabriel and the balance used to meet High Techs liability 
for VAT. The Judge found that Mr Gabriel knew nothing about these plans, 
which were entirely inconsistent with his understanding of the transaction 
and would not have been acceptable to him. They meant that Mr Little, 
instead of contributing a property to the project and using the loan to 
develop it, proposed to contribute nothing to the project. The loan money 
would in effect be used to pay off a debt owed by his principal operating 
company to the bank, leaving nothing to fund the development unless it 
could be found from other sources. The Judge found that Whiteshore never 
had any assets or income other than Mr Gabriels loan and the property 
purchased with it, and that there was some evidence that Mr Littles 
personal finances were under some strain from at least this time.

6.                   Mr Richard Spencer was an assistant solicitor at BPE 
Solicitors in Cheltenham. Mr Gabriel had instructed him earlier that year, 
in connection with a proposal to lend money for a rather similar scheme of 
Mr Littles concerning another property, which in the event had not 
proceeded. Mr Gabriel decided to instruct him to draw up a facility letter 
and a charge over Building 428. Mr Spencer received his instructions in a 
rather unconventional way. The Judge found that they came not from Mr 
Gabriel himself but from Mr Little, in a voicemail message left on his 
telephone. Mr Little told him that he intended to sell Building 428 to 
Whiteshore and that Mr Gabriel would lend him the money. Mr Spencer at no 
time sought confirmation or clarification of these instructions from Mr 
Gabriel himself. He proceeded to draw up the facility letter and the 
charge. Unfortunately, he used as a template for the facility letter the 
document drafted for the abortive transaction earlier in the year. This 
contained statements to the effect that the loan moneys will be made 
available as a contribution to the costs of the development of the 
property, and that the purpose of the loan was to assist with the costs 
of the development of the property. Mr Spencer did not notice these 
statements and failed to remove them. They accordingly found their way into 
the documentation for Building 428 as executed, although they did not 
accord with Mr Littles actual plans or with the instructions that Mr 
Spencer had received from him. They did, however, accord with Mr Gabriels 
understanding of what was proposed and served to confirm it.

7.                   On 7 December 2007 there was a completion meeting at 
BPEs offices attended by (among others) Mr Gabriel, Mr Spencer, Mr Little 
and his solicitor, The Judge found that at the meeting Mr Gabriel learned 
for the first time that Building 428 belonged to High Tech, that it was 
charged to the bank and that it was intended to discharge the banks 
charge. But he was not told that this was to be funded with the loan 
moneys. The Judge found that Mr Gabriel was taken through the facility 
letter and read and noted the statements that the loan moneys were to be 
used to fund the development. He signed it and advanced the money on that 
basis. The judge found that he would not have done so if he had known the 
use which Mr Little in fact proposed to make of the loan moneys. The terms 
of the facility letter were that the loan would be drawn down on 13 
December 2007 and repaid on 12 March 2009, together with a lump sum of 
£70,000, described as Mr Gabriels return.

8.                   The existing planning permission had been granted in 
February 2004 and was due to expire in February 2009. It provided for 227 
square metres (2,659 square feet) of office accommodation. The Judge found 
that Mr Gabriel understood that the development was to be carried out in 
accordance with the existing planning permission, but the details do not 
appear to have been discussed at the time of the transaction. He recorded 
Mr Littles evidence that he had always had it in mind to get planning 
permission for a somewhat larger office development on the site and that 
this possibility had been discussed with Mr Gabriel at the time of the 
transaction. The Judge made no finding to this effect, but it is consistent 
with Mr Gabriels evidence that he was told at the outset that the square 
footage would be between 3,500 and 4,000, which substantially exceeded the 
square footage allowed by the existing planning permission. At some stage 
which is unclear but appears to have been early in 2008, Mr Little applied 
for an enhanced planning permission. The Judge recorded various 
conversations in the course of 2008 and 2009 in which he told Mr Gabriel 
about unspecified difficulties and delays in obtaining it. In July 2009, a 
further application was made for enhanced planning permission, which was 
granted in August 2009. The new planning permission was for a development 
of 398 square metres (3,283 square feet), including 103 square metres 
(1,108 square feet) of ancillary storage, plant and equipment space and 
staff facilities. This roughly corresponded to the 3,500 to 4,000 feet 
which Mr Gabriel said had been mentioned to him in 2007. It represented a 
45% increase in the usable office space and a 75% increase in the gross 
developed space envisaged in the original planning permission of 2004.

9.                   The transaction was a failure and Mr Gabriel lost all 
his money. The repayment date (12 March 2009) came and went without any 
significant construction work being carried out. No attempt was ever made 
to develop the property in accordance with either planning permission. In 
late 2009, Mr Gabriel took steps to exercise his power of sale. The 
property was put onto the market, but failed to find a buyer. Finally, in 
July 2010, it was sold by auction and fetched £13,000, which was entirely 
consumed by the expenses of sale. Whiteshore never made any payments under 
the facility agreement, and was eventually dissolved. Mr Gabriel recovered 
nothing except £8,191.56 which was paid by Mr Little personally.

The proceedings

10.              Mr Gabriel sued Mr Little, Whiteshore and High Tech for 
fraud and negligent misrepresentation. He sued BPE for dishonest assistance 
in a breach of an implied trust of the loan moneys to apply them to the 
cost of development, and for negligence. The action was tried in May 2012 
by Mr Robert Englehart QC sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Chancery 
Division. He dismissed all the claims against Mr Little, Whiteshore and 
High Tech. He held that there was no implied trust of the loan moneys, so 
that BPE could not be liable for dishonestly assisting a breach of it. 
Turning to the case against BPE in negligence, the Judge held that they had 
no duty to advise Mr Gabriel about the commercial risks associated with the 
project, but should have explained to him that the funds would be applied 
for Mr Littles benefit and that in reality he was not putting anything 
into the project. Mr Spencer failed to do that, and indeed negligently 
misled Mr Gabriel by allowing statements to appear in the loan 
documentation which suggested the opposite.

11.              At the trial there was an issue, which assumed decisive 
importance on the subsequent appeals, as to whether if the £200,000 had in 
fact been spent on the development, it would have enhanced the value of the 
property. Mr Gabriels case was that he was entitled to damages 
representing the entire loss which he had suffered by entering into the 
transaction, on the ground that he would not have done so had he not been 
misled about the proposed use of the loan moneys. BPEs case was that Mr 
Gabriels loss arose from Mr Littles over-optimistic assessment of the 
likely cost of development, coupled with his own commercial misjudgements 
about the likely value of the property before and after development. Mr 
Spencer had no knowledge of or responsibility for these matters. His 
instructions were limited to drawing up the facility letter and the charge. 
BPE sought to make this case by proving that the development project was 
never viable. The costs would have been greatly in excess of £200,000, with 
the result that when the money ran out the development would have been left 
incomplete and the property unsaleable. Mr Gabriel would therefore have 
suffered the same loss even if the transaction had proceeded as he had been 
led to expect.

12.              The judge accepted Mr Gabriels case on this point. The 
critical finding was at para 90 of his judgment:

       I agree with Mr Davie that BPE would not be liable if what Mr
       Gabriel had in mind, that is expenditure of about £200,000 on a
       property which would not have an acquisition cost, was unviable and
       bound to fail so that Mr Gabriel would never have recovered his
       loan. Certainly, the evidence was to the effect that what was being
       proposed for Building 428 was likely to cost far in excess of
       £200,000. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that no development
       whatsoever, particularly with Mr Littles own company doing the
       construction, could have been achieved so as to make Mr Gabriels
       investment of £200,000 a viable proposition. Clearly, there would
       have been risks, not least from the unusual nature and location of
       the property, and it is quite possible that development plans would
       have required re-thinking. But, I do not think it would be right for
       me to conclude that this was necessarily going to be a doomed
       venture for Mr Gabriel from the outset.

13.              Having concluded on these grounds that Mr Gabriel might 
have recovered his money if the transaction had been as he thought it was, 
the Judge held that any loss resulting from the transaction was 
foreseeable, and recoverable subject to contributory negligence and 
mitigation. He assessed it at £191,808.44, being the advance less the 
amount received from Mr Little, to which statutory interest was added from 
the date of drawdown.

14.              The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal. The leading 
judgment was given by Gloster LJ, with which Fulford and Maurice Kay LJJ 
agreed. She found (para 81(ii)):

       There was no positive evidence to the effect that, if £200,000 had
       been spent on developing the property, its value would have been
       such as to ensure recovery of Mr Gabriels loan or, in other words,
       that the transaction was viable. On the contrary, such evidence as
       was before the judge suggested that expenditure in such amount would
       not have increased the value of the property. As Mr Stewart
       submitted, the judge, in my view wrongly, reversed the burden of
       proof by finding that the defendants had not persuaded him that no
       development was possible. That the value of the developed property,
       by the utilisation of funds of £200,000, would have been such as to
       ensure recovery of Mr Gabriels loan was a matter for Mr Gabriel to
       allege and to prove.

The Court of Appeal accordingly held that the whole loss was attributable 
to Mr Gabriels misjudgements and reduced the damages to nil. They also 
held, for largely overlapping reasons, that had there been any recoverable 
loss, it would have been reduced by 75% for contributory negligence.

15.              Before this court, Mr Halpern QC, representing the 
Trustee, has attacked this result on a broad front. He submitted (i) that 
the Court of Appeal was not entitled to substitute its own assessment of 
the viability of the development project for that of the judge, and (ii) 
that even if it was entitled to do so, Mr Gabriel was entitled in law to 
the whole loss flowing from a transaction into which he would not have 
entered but for Mr Spencers negligence.

The viability of the development project

16.              It is necessary to start with this question, because it 
provided the essential foundation for the Court of Appeals reduction of 
the damages to nil. Mr Stewart QC, who appeared for BPE, accepted that 
unless the Court of Appeal was right to find that the development project 
was unviable, the judges award of damages must be restored, subject only 
to abatement for contributory negligence.

17.              I have cited the Judges conclusion above. Gloster LJ 
appears to have rejected it mainly on the ground that he applied the wrong 
burden of proof. She considered that Mr Gabriel had the burden of proving 
that the project would have been viable, and had failed to produce positive 
evidence to that effect. She did, however, observe that such evidence as 
was before the Judge suggested that the expenditure would not have 
enhanced the value of the property, albeit without identifying what 
evidence she had in mind.

18.              I shall deal later in this judgment with the burden of 
proof, which is a question of some general importance. But it is not 
decisive of the issue of fact, because in my judgment the evidence 
sufficiently showed that the value of the property would not have been 
enhanced by the expenditure of £200,000 on its development. My reasons are 
as follows:

    (1)       Building 428 was on any view an unattractive investment
    prospect. It was an old and run-down disused heating tower. The ground
    was contaminated by hydrocarbons, and to comply with the conditions of
    the two planning permissions, it would have been necessary to spend
    about £30,000 on decontamination before any development could start.
    The Judge recorded the view of the auctioneers employed in July 2010
    (Allsop) that it would be a difficult lot to sell. Some of their
    reasons reflected the difficult conditions of the commercial property
    market in the aftermath of the financial crisis. But others would have
    been relevant factors at any time. In their opinion, the building was
    in an unattractive location for a developer, likely to have high
    development costs and unlikely to attract much interest. This judgment
    was borne out by the result of the auction.

    (2)       The evidence clearly established that expenditure on
    development would have enhanced the value of the property only if the
    development had been substantially completed. It follows that although
    Mr Gabriels interest was in the value of the property as security for
    his loan, this was dependent on the viability of the development
    project, and in particular on there being enough money to complete it.
    It was not suggested that Mr Little would have had any resources
    available for completing it other than the £200,000 lent by Mr Gabriel.
    Mr Gabriels prospect of getting his money back therefore depended
    mainly on the reliability of Mr Littles estimate of about £200,000 for
    the development costs.

    (3)       At the trial, most of the evidence about the costs of
    development related to the larger development envisaged in the planning
    permission of July 2009. It showed that Mr Middleton, an experienced
    quantity surveyor consulted by Mr Gabriel in November 2009, had
    estimated the cost of development in accordance with the 2009 planning
    permission at £468,359.98, not including VAT, fees or plastering to the
    water tower. Both of the expert quantity surveyors who gave evidence at
    the trial regarded this figure as too low. One of them (Mr Gabriels
    expert) estimated the costs at £667,804.73, not including fees. All of
    these figures implied a large loss had the 2009 project ever been
    completed.

    (4)       What is less clear is the relationship between the cost of
    development according to the 2009 planning permission and the cost of
    development according to the somewhat more modest development
    authorised by the 2004 planning permission which had existed at the
    time of the transaction in 2007. One would expect the 2007 project to
    have cost less. It was, however, Mr Gabriels own pleaded case that the
    nature and cost of the required development/refurbishment did not
    materially increase between November 2007 and November 2009. This may
    have reflected his understanding that a development of 3,500 to 4,000
    square feet had always been envisaged. But whatever the reason, he did
    not resile from it and the cross-examination by BPEs counsel of his
    expert valuer Mr Heming proceeded on that basis. Mr Heming accepted (on
    the same basis) that although development values were higher in 2007
    than in 2009, a valuer of the security in 2007 would have concluded
    that the development project was unviable because £200,000 would not
    have been enough to complete it. Since the cost of development
    according to the 2009 plans was well over double and possibly as much
    as three and a half times Mr Littles estimate of 2007, the Judges
    remark (para 49) that the figures cast doubt on the latters
    reliability, seems to be something of an understatement. He did not
    make a firm finding of his own about the development costs, but
    accepted (para 90) that they were likely to be far in excess of
    £200,000.

    (5)       This is consistent with Mr Littles conduct between 2007 and
    2009. For most of that period, he was attempting to obtain the planning
    permission for the enlarged scheme that was eventually granted in
    August 2009. The probability must be that this was because the
    economics of the 2007 project were even less satisfactory than those of
    its successor.

    (6)       Against this background, it is right to draw attention to the
    extremely tentative and conditional basis of the Judges conclusion.
    Having found that the development would cost much more than £200,000,
    he suggested that it was nevertheless quite possible that the
    development plans would have required some unspecified rethinking,
    and declared that he was not persuaded that no development whatever,
    particularly with Mr Littles own company doing the construction would
    have enabled Mr Gabriel to recover his £200,000. He appears to have
    envisaged some unspecified modification to the plans. However, no such
    modification was proposed during the period between the making of the
    loan agreement and Mr Gabriels exercise of his power of sale, and none
    was canvassed with the witnesses. It is therefore difficult to attach
    any weight to the hypothesis on which the Judge appears to have
    proceeded. What stands out is that even on that hypothesis, the Judge
    made no finding that it would have enabled Mr Gabriel to recover his
    investment, only that the possibility could not be ruled out. In the
    face of the evidence which I have summarised, this falls a long way
    short of a finding that this project was viable at any stage.

19.              In my judgment, irrespective of the incidence of the 
burden of proof, the Court of Appeal was entitled to find that the 
expenditure of £200,000 would not have enhanced the value of the property. 
It follows from this that the factual basis of BPEs case on damages is 
sound. It remains to consider its legal basis.

The SAAMCO Principle

20.              Courts of law, said Lord Asquith in Stapley v Gypsum Mines 
Ltd [1953] AC 663, 687, must accept the fact that the philosophic doctrine 
of causation and the juridical doctrine of responsibility for the 
consequences of a negligent act diverge. What Lord Asquith meant by the 
philosophic doctrine of causation, as he went on to explain, was the 
proposition that any event that would have not have occurred but for the 
act of the defendant must be regarded as the consequence of that act. In 
the law of damages, this has never been enough. It is generally a necessary 
condition for the recovery of a loss that it would not have been suffered 
but for the breach of duty. But it is not always a sufficient condition. 
The reason, as Lord Asquith pointed out, is that the law is concerned with 
assigning responsibility for the consequences of the breach, and a 
defendant is not necessarily responsible in law for everything that follows 
from his act, even if it is wrongful. A variety of legal concepts serves to 
limit the matters for which a wrongdoer is legally responsible. Thus the 
law distinguishes between a mere precondition or occasion for a loss and an 
act which gives rise to a liability to make it good by way of damages: 
Galoo Ltd v Bright Grahame Murray [1994] 1 WLR 1360. Effective or 
substantial causation is a familiar example of a legal filter which serves 
to eliminate certain losses from the scope of a defendants responsibility. 
It is an aspect of legal causation. So too is the rule that the defendant 
cannot be held liable for losses that the claimant could reasonably have 
been expected to avoid: Koch Marine Inc v dAmica Societa di Navigazione 
ARL (the ELENA DAMICO) [1980] 1 Lloyds Rep 75. But the relevant filters 
are not limited to those which can be analysed in terms of causation. 
Ultimately, all of them depend on a developed judicial instinct about the 
nature or extent of the duty which the wrongdoer has broken.

21.              This is not a new idea, although it took some time for its 
significance to be fully appreciated. In Roe v Ministry of Health [1954] 2 
QB 66, 85, Denning LJ pointed out that questions of duty, causation and 
remoteness were intimately linked and all directed to the same fundamental 
question: Is the consequence fairly to be regarded as within the risk? In 
Council of the Shire of Sutherland v Heyman (1985) 157 CLR 424
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1985/41.html> , 487, Brennan J 
pointed out that the statutory duty of a local authority to approve 
building plans could not be made the basis of a general duty to protect a 
subsequent purchaser against even foreseeable problems in the course of 
construction:

       It is impermissible to postulate a duty of care to avoid one kind
       of damage - say, personal injury - and, finding the defendant guilty
       of failing to discharge that duty, to hold him liable for the damage
       actually suffered that is of another and independent kind - say,
       economic loss. Not only may the respective duties differ in what is
       required to discharge them; the duties may be owed to different
       persons or classes of persons. That is not to say that a plaintiff
       who suffers damage of some kind will succeed or fail in an action to
       recover damages according to his classification of the damage he
       suffered. The question is always whether the defendant was under a
       duty to avoid or prevent that damage, but the actual nature of the
       damage suffered is relevant to the existence and extent of any duty
       to avoid or prevent it.

22.              In Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Morts Dock & Engineering 
Co Ltd (The Wagon Mound) [1961] AC 388, the Privy Council reframed an issue 
which had been presented as depending on remoteness of damage in terms of 
the scope of the duty owed in tort. Viscount Simonds, delivering the advice 
of the Board, observed, at p 425:

       It is, no doubt, proper when considering tortious liability for
       negligence to analyse its elements and to say that the plaintiff
       must prove a duty owed to him by the defendant, a breach of that
       duty by the defendant, and consequent damage. But there can be no
       liability until the damage has been done. It is not the act but the
       consequences on which tortious liability is founded. Just as (as it
       has been said) there is no such thing as negligence in the air, so
       there is no such thing as liability in the air  It is vain to
       isolate the liability from its context and to say that B is or is
       not liable, and then to ask for what damage he is liable. For his
       liability is in respect of that damage and no other.

23.              In Caparo Industries plc v Dickman [1990] 2 AC 605, the 
House of Lords held that a companys auditor was not liable for negligent 
statements in his statutory report which led the plaintiff to make an offer 
for the companys shares. The reason was that the purpose of the auditors 
report was limited to enabling shareholders to make informed decisions 
about the exercise of their rights under the constitution of the company. 
It followed that no duty was owed to non-shareholders. It also followed 
that, although a duty was owed to shareholders, the auditors legal 
responsibility to them did not extend to investment decisions that they 
might make in reliance on his report. Lord Bridge, citing Brennan Js 
observation, said (p 627):

       It is never sufficient to ask simply whether A owes B a duty of
       care. It is always necessary to determine the scope of the duty by
       reference to the kind of damage from which A must take care to save
       B harmless.

Lord Oliver in the same case at p 654 said:

       To widen the scope of the duty to include loss caused to an
       individual by reliance upon the accounts for a purpose for which
       they were not supplied and were not intended would be to extend it
       beyond the limits which are so far deducible from the decisions of
       this House.

24.              This principle underwent considerable development as a 
result of a number of cases arising from the negligent valuation of 
property for security purposes before the property crash of the early 
1990s. The leading case is the decision of the House of Lords in South 
Australia Asset Management Corpn v York Montague Ltd [1997] AC 191 (
SAAMCO), but the principle for which it is authority was subsequently 
elaborated in two further decisions of the House, Nykredit Mortgage Bank 
Plc v Edward Erdman Group Ltd (formerly Edward Erdman) (No 2) [1997] 1 WLR 
1627 and Platform Home Loans Ltd v Oyston Shipways Ltd [2000] 2 AC 190.

25.              The SAAMCO litigation involved a number of actions which 
had been decided together in the High Court by Phillips J under the title 
Banque Bruxelles Lambert SA v Eagle Star Insurance Co [1995] 2 All ER 769. 
He held that the valuer was not liable for that proportion of the lenders 
loss on the loan which was attributable to the fall in the market after the 
valuation date, even though (i) the lender would not have entered into the 
transaction but for the valuers negligence; (ii) in some of the cases the 
lender would not even have lent a lesser sum, either because a lesser loan 
would have fallen outside its lending guidelines or because it would have 
been of no interest to the borrower; and (iii) adverse market movements 
were foreseeable. The reason, as expressed in the submission of counsel 
which Phillips J accepted (p 805), was that the lender

       deliberately assumed the risk that they might suffer loss as a
       result of a fall in the property market. They did not rely upon John
       D Woods valuation to protect them against that risk. In these
       circumstances John D Wood owed no duty to protect BBL from this type
       of loss.

At pp 806-807, Phillips J stated the principle as follows:

       Where a party is contemplating a commercial venture that involves a
       number of heads of risk and obtains professional advice in respect
       of one head of risk before embarking on the venture, I do not see
       why negligent advice in respect of that head of risk should, in
       effect, make the adviser the underwriter of the entire venture. More
       particularly, where the negligent advice relates to the existence or
       amount of some security against risk in the venture, I do not see
       why the adviser should be liable for all the consequences of the
       venture, whether or not the security in question would have
       protected against them.

26.              The Court of Appeal [1995] QB 375 reversed Phillips Js 
decision on damages and rejected the principle which he had applied. They 
distinguished between no transaction cases, in which the transaction 
would not have proceeded but for the defendants negligence and successful 
transaction cases in which it would have proceeded but possibly on 
different terms or for a different amount. The Court of Appeal held that 
once it was proved that the lender would not have made the particular loan 
but for the valuers negligence, the valuer was liable for the entire loss 
flowing from the transaction so far as it was foreseeable.

27.              The House of Lords allowed the appeal. They accepted the 
principle underlying Phillips Js decision, but their reasoning was more 
elaborate and the way in which they applied it was different. The leading 
speech was delivered by Lord Hoffmann, with whom the rest of the Appellate 
Committee agreed. The essential distinction which underlies the whole of 
his analysis is between the assessment of the loss caused by the breach of 
duty and the extent of the defendants duty to protect the claimant against 
it. Referring to the principle applied by the Court of Appeal, that damages 
should be such as to put the claimant as nearly in the position that he 
would have been in had the breach not occurred, Lord Hoffmann said, at p 
211:

       I think that this was the wrong place to begin. Before one can
       consider the principle on which one should calculate the damages to
       which a plaintiff is entitled as compensation for loss, it is
       necessary to decide for what kind of loss he is entitled to
       compensation. A correct description of the loss for which the valuer
       is liable must precede any consideration of the measure of damages.
       For this purpose it is better to begin at the beginning and consider
       the lenders cause of action.

28.              He then referred to the nature of the valuers duty in the 
case before him. The purpose of the valuation was to form part of the 
material on which the lender was to decide whether, and if so how much he 
would lend, what margin, if any would sufficiently allow for foreseeable 
valuation errors or a future fall in the market, accidental damage to the 
property and any other contingencies that may happen.

       On the other hand, the valuer will not ordinarily be privy to the
       other considerations which the lender may take into account, such as
       how much money he has available, how much the borrower needs to
       borrow, the strength of his covenant, the attraction of the rate of
       interest or the other personal or commercial considerations which
       may induce the lender to lend.

Referring to the decision in Caparo, he said:

       A duty of care such as the valuer owes does not however exist in
       the abstract. A plaintiff who sues for breach of a duty imposed by
       the law (whether in contract or tort or under statute) must do more
       than prove that the defendant has failed to comply. He must show
       that the duty was owed to him and that it was a duty in respect of
       the kind of loss which he has suffered.

29.              Against this background, Lord Hoffmann expressed the 
principle thus, at p 214:

       It is that a person under a duty to take reasonable care to provide
       information on which someone else will decide upon a course of
       action is, if negligent, not generally regarded as responsible for
       all the consequences of that course of action. He is responsible
       only for the consequences of the information being wrong. A duty of
       care which imposes upon the informant responsibility for losses
       which would have occurred even if the information which he gave had
       been correct is not in my view fair and reasonable as between the
       parties. It is therefore inappropriate either as an implied term of
       a contract or as a tortious duty arising from the relationship
       between them.

       The principle thus stated distinguishes between a duty to provide
       information for the purpose of enabling someone else to decide upon
       a course of action and a duty to advise someone as to what course of
       action he should take. If the duty is to advise whether or not a
       course of action should be taken, the adviser must take reasonable
       care to consider all the potential consequences of that course of
       action. If he is negligent, he will therefore be responsible for all
       the foreseeable loss which is a consequence of that course of action
       having been taken. If his duty is only to supply information, he
       must take reasonable care to ensure that the information is correct
       and, if he is negligent, will be responsible for all the foreseeable
       consequences of the information being wrong.

30.              Lord Hoffmann did not, however, assess the damages as 
Phillips J had done, by simply stripping out the proportion of the loss 
that could be attributed to the fall in the market. Instead, he limited the 
damages to the difference between the valuation and the true value, on the 
ground that the recoverable loss could not exceed what the lender would 
have lost if the valuation had been correct: see pp 222-223. In effect this 
meant that although the measure for breach of warranty differs from the 
measure of damages for breach of a duty of care, the loss attributable to 
the negligence which caused the valuation to be wrong could not exceed what 
the lender could have claimed if the valuer had warranted that it was 
right. Lord Hoffmann derived this principle from the earlier decisions of 
the House in Swingcastle Ltd v Alastair Gibson [1991] 2 AC 223 and Banque 
Keyser Ullmann SA v Skandia (UK) Insurance Co Ltd [1991] 2 AC 249. He 
justified it on more general grounds at pp 213-214:

       It would seem paradoxical that the liability of a person who
       warranted the accuracy of the information should be less than that
       of a person who gave no such warranty but failed to take reasonable
       care.

31.              The principle thus stated is, as Professor Murdoch has 
described it in an illuminating article, an essentially negative one: 
Negligent Valuers, Falling Markets and Risk Allocation, [2000] 8 Tort Law 
Review, 183, 198. The lender is prima facie entitled to the entire loss 
flowing from his entry into the loan transaction, except those which would 
still have been suffered if the property had been worth what the valuer 
said it was worth. In the follow-on appeal in Nykredit Mortgage Bank plc v 
Edward Erdman Group Ltd [1997] 1 WLR 1627, Lord Nicholls, with the 
concurrence of the rest of the Appellate Committee, described the two 
stages of the inquiry at p 1631. The first stage in a case where the lender 
would not have entered into the transaction but for the breach of duty, was 
to compare the position had he not entered into it with his actual 
position. This meant comparing the amount of the loan with the value of the 
real and personal rights obtained. Turning to the second stage, he said:

       However, for the reasons spelled out by my noble and learned
       friend, Lord Hoffmann, in the substantive judgments in this case 
       [1997] AC 191, a defendant valuer is not liable for all the
       consequences which flow from the lender entering into the
       transaction. He is not even liable for all the foreseeable
       consequences. He is not liable for consequences which would have
       arisen even if the advice had been correct. He is not liable for
       these because they are the consequences of risks the lender would
       have taken upon himself if the valuation advice had been sound. As
       such they are not within the scope of the duty owed to the lender by
       the valuer.

32.              This has commonly been referred to as the SAAMCO cap, as 
indeed it was in the course of argument in this case. But Lord Hoffmann 
himself, at pp 219-220, rejected the label, essentially because the two 
stages described by Lord Nicholls were directed to different things. The 
first involved ascertaining what loss the claimant would have avoided if 
the defendant had performed his task carefully, as he should have done, 
whereas the second involved awarding only that part of the loss which was 
within the scope of the defendants duty. He put it this way:

       An alternative theory was that the lender should be entitled to
       recover the whole of his loss, subject to a cap limiting his
       recovery to the amount of the overvaluation. This theory will
       ordinarily produce the same result as the requirement that loss
       should be a consequence of the valuation being wrong, because the
       usual such consequence is that the lender makes an advance which he
       thinks is secured to a correspondingly greater extent. But I would
       not wish to exclude the possibility that other kinds of loss may
       flow from the valuation being wrong, and in any case, as [Counsel]
       said on behalf of the defendants York Montague Ltd, it seems odd to
       start by choosing the wrong measure of damages (the whole loss) and
       then correct the error by imposing a cap. The appearance of a cap is
       actually the result of the plaintiff having to satisfy two separate
       requirements: first, to prove that he has suffered loss, and,
       secondly, to establish that the loss fell within the scope of the
       duty he was owed.

33.              Lord Hoffmann made a similar point in his speech in the 
Nykredit appeal, again with the concurrence of the rest of the Committee. 
After explaining that the true measure of damages was the loss attributable 
to the information being wrong, he said:

       It is of course also the case that the lender cannot recover if he
       is, on balance, in a better or no worse position than if he had not
       entered into the transaction at all. He will have suffered no loss.
       The valuer does not warrant the accuracy of his valuation and the
       lender cannot therefore complain that he would have made more profit
       if the valuation had been correct. But in order to establish a cause
       of action in negligence he must show that his loss is attributable
       to the overvaluation, that is, that he is worse off than he would
       have been if it had been correct.

The result, as Lord Hobhouse put it in Platform Home Loans Ltd v Oyston 
Shipways Ltd [2000] 2 AC 190, 210, is that the damages

       are confined to that part of the plaintiffs basic loss caused by
       the defendants negligence which can be equated in money terms to
       the amount of the defendants overvaluation.

34.              The decision in SAAMCO has often been misunderstood, not 
least by the writers who have criticised it. The misunderstanding arises, I 
think, from a tendency to overlook two fundamental features of the 
reasoning.

35.              The first is that where the contribution of the defendant 
is to supply material which the client will take into account in making his 
own decision on the basis of a broader assessment of the risks, the 
defendant has no legal responsibility for his decision. Lord Hoffmann made 
this point in the Nykredit case. Speaking of the decision in SAAMCO, he 
said (p 1638):

       The principle approved by the House was that the valuer owes no
       duty of care to the lender in respect of his entering into the
       transaction as such and that it is therefore insufficient, for the
       purpose of establishing liability on the part of the valuer, to
       prove that the lender is worse off than he would have been if he had
       not lent the money at all. What he must show is that he is worse off
       as a lender than he would have been if the security had been worth
       what the valuer said.

This is why in SAAMCO itself Lord Hoffmann had rejected the distinction 
made by the Court of Appeal between no transaction and successful 
transaction cases. It was irrelevant to the scope of the duty of care: p 
218C-D, G.

36.              The second fundamental feature of the reasoning follows 
from the first. It is that the principle has nothing to do with the 
causation of loss as that expression is usually understood in the law. Lord 
Hoffmann made this point immediately after the observation which I have 
quoted from Nykredit:

       It is important to emphasise that this is a consequence of the
       limited way in which the House defined the valuers duty of care and
       has nothing to do with questions of causation or any limit or cap
       imposed upon damages which would otherwise be recoverable. It was
       accepted that the whole loss suffered by reason of the fall in the
       property market was, as a matter of causation, properly attributable
       to the lender having entered into the transaction and that, but for
       the negligent valuation, he would not have done so. It was not
       suggested that the possibility of a fall in the market was
       unforeseeable or that there was any other factor which negatived the
       causal connection between lending and losing the money  Nor, if one
       started from the proposition that the valuer was responsible for the
       consequences of the loan being made, could there be any logical
       basis for limiting the recoverable damages to the amount of the
       overvaluation. The essence of the decision was that this is not
       where one starts and that the valuer is responsible only for the
       consequences of the lender having too little security.

Criticisms

37.              Once the reasoning in SAAMCO and Nykredit is properly 
understood, it is possible to address some of the criticisms which have 
been directed against them, criticisms which Mr Halpern QC has adopted on 
behalf of the Trustee on this appeal. They revolve around three main 
matters. The first is the question whether it is correct to describe the 
limitation on damages in SAAMCO and Nykredit as having nothing to do with 
causation. The second is the distinction between information and advice in 
Lord Hoffmanns formulation of the principle. The third is the operation of 
the so-called cap or, as I would prefer to call it, the restriction on 
the damages that may be recovered.

38.              The first criticism was among those made by Professor Jane 
Stapleton in a case note on SAAMCO, Negligent valuers and falls in the 
property market (1997) 113 LQR 1. She argued (p 3) that it was always 
necessary to determine what the consequences of the breach of duty were 
even though it was also necessary to determine for which of those 
consequences liability should attach, e.g. all foreseeable consequences or 
only certain foreseeable ones. This criticism, which was put before the 
Appellate Committee in Nykredit, may have influenced the two-stage analysis 
adopted by Lord Nicholls and Lord Hoffmann in that case: see paras 32-33 
above. Lord Hoffmann himself, speaking extra-judicially has subsequently 
acknowledged its force: Causation, (2005) 121 LQR 592. When one 
considers what causal relationship is required, he observes at p 596,

       one is really speaking about extent of the liability and not about
       the scope of the duty.  I shall try to mend my language in future.
       But I will say this. There is a close link between the nature of the
       duty and the extent of the liability for breach of that duty.

It is, however, clear that Lord Hoffmann regarded the point as a mere 
question of terminology, which did not go to the real principle being 
applied. The scope (or nature) of the duty remained in his view a 
critical factor in determining the extent of liability. I agree with this. 
Questions of causation are normally concerned with identifying the 
consequences which flow from the breach. If the SAAMCO principle is to be 
classified as a principle of causation, it is certainly not directed to 
that question, as the House of Lords pointed out in Nykredit. The question 
which it poses is rather whether the loss flowed from the right thing, ie 
from the particular feature of the defendants conduct which made it 
wrongful. That turns on an analysis of what did make it wrongful. Whether 
one describes the principle in SAAMCO and Nykredit as turning on the scope 
of the duty or the extent of the liability for breach of it does not alter 
the way in which the principle applies. It is clear that Lord Hoffmann did 
not accept Professor Stapletons more fundamental criticisms of the 
so-called SAAMCO cap in his lecture of 2005, any more than he had 
accepted them in Nykredit.

39.              Turning to the distinction between advice and information, 
this has given rise to confusion largely because of the descriptive 
inadequacy of these labels. On the face of it they are neither distinct nor 
mutually exclusive categories. Information given by a professional man to 
his client is usually a specific form of advice, and most advice will 
involve conveying information. Neither label really corresponds to the 
contents of the bottle. The nature of the distinction is, however, clear 
from its place in Lord Hoffmanns analysis as well as from his language.

40.              In cases falling within Lord Hoffmanns advice category, 
it is left to the adviser to consider what matters should be taken into 
account in deciding whether to enter into the transaction. His duty is to 
consider all relevant matters and not only specific factors in the 
decision. If one of those matters is negligently ignored or misjudged, and 
this proves to be critical to the decision, the client will in principle be 
entitled to recover all loss flowing from the transaction which he should 
have protected his client against. The House of Lords might have said of 
the advice cases that the client was entitled to the losses flowing from 
the transaction if they were not just attributable to risks within the 
scope of the advisers duty but to risks which had been negligently 
assessed by the adviser. In the great majority of cases, this would have 
assimilated the two categories. An adviser would simply have been legally 
responsible for a wider range of informational errors. But in a case where 
the adviser is responsible for guiding the whole decision-making process, 
there is a certain pragmatic justice in the test that the Appellate 
Committee preferred. If the adviser has a duty to protect his client (so 
far as due care can do it) against the full range of risks associated with 
a potential transaction, the client will not have retained responsibility 
for any of them. The advisers responsibility extends to the decision. If 
the adviser has negligently assessed risk A, the result is that the overall 
riskiness of the transaction has been understated. If the client would not 
have entered into the transaction on a careful assessment of its overall 
merits, the fact that the loss may have resulted from risks B, C or D 
should not matter.

41.              By comparison, in the information category, a 
professional adviser contributes a limited part of the material on which 
his client will rely in deciding whether to enter into a prospective 
transaction, but the process of identifying the other relevant 
considerations and the overall assessment of the commercial merits of the 
transaction are exclusively matters for the client (or possibly his other 
advisers). In such a case, as Lord Hoffmann explained in Nykredit, the 
defendants legal responsibility does not extend to the decision itself. It 
follows that even if the material which the defendant supplied is known to 
be critical to the decision to enter into the transaction, he is liable 
only for the financial consequences of its being wrong and not for the 
financial consequences of the claimant entering into the transaction so far 
as these are greater. Otherwise the defendant would become the underwriter 
of the financial fortunes of the whole transaction by virtue of having 
assumed a duty of care in relation to just one element of someone elses 
decision.

42.              What is clear is that the fact that the material 
contributed by the defendant is known to be critical to the claimants 
decision whether to enter into the transaction does not itself turn it into 
an advice case. Otherwise all no transaction cases would give rise to 
liability for the entire foreseeable loss flowing from the transaction, 
which is the very proposition rejected in SAAMCO. I respectfully agree with 
the careful analysis of this point by Rix LJ, giving the leading judgment 
in the Court of Appeal in Haugesund Kommune v Depfa ACS Bank (Wikborg Rein 
& Co, Part 20 defendant) (No 2) [2011] 3 All ER 655. The facts of that case 
were that a firm of lawyers had negligently advised that a Norwegian local 
authority had legal capacity to enter into a loan agreement, when it did 
not. A local authoritys legal capacity to borrow might fairly be thought 
fundamental to any decision to lend it money, and the evidence was that but 
for the lawyers advice the bank would not have lent. But under Norwegian 
law the debt would not have been enforceable against the assets of the 
authority even if legal capacity had existed, making the debt in effect one 
of honour only. Rix LJ held that it was an information case, because 
legal capacity was only one factor in a wider assessment of whether to lend 
the money, with which the lawyers were not concerned. At para 75, he said:

       It is of course true that Depfa would not have entered into the
       transactions at all unless it could be advised that the contracts
       were valid and within the kommunes capacity. In effect, that causal
       connection between advice and loss goes without saying in all such
       cases. It is not in itself the reason for finding that the scope of
       duty concerned embraces all the loss consequential upon entering
       into the transaction concerned. For these reasons it does not seem
       to me that it is a sufficient explanation for characterising a case
       as a category 2 [sc advice] case to say that, without the
       forthcoming albeit negligent advice, the transaction concerned would
       not have been viable. That is simply another way of saying that,
       if the claimant had not received the advice it did, it would not
       have entered into the transaction.

43.              Aneco Reinsurance Underwriting Ltd v Johnson & Higgins 
[2002] PNLR 8 was a case which on its facts fell on the other side of the 
line. The claimant reinsurer proposed to reinsure a book of excess of loss 
business. He intended to proceed only if he could retrocede $11m of the 
risk. He instructed a broker to place the retrocession. The broker reported 
that he had placed it, but he failed to present the risk fairly to the 
retrocessionaires, with the result that after the claimant had written the 
reinsurance his retrocession was avoided. The claimant claimed to be 
entitled to recover the entire loss, $35m, which had been incurred on the 
reinsurance on the basis that he would not have entered into it if he had 
not been assured that the retrocession was in place and (by implication) 
enforceable. The House of Lords, in agreement with the Court of Appeal, 
classified it as an advice case. This had the ironic consequence that 
although the claimant had apparently been content to assume an exposure of 
$35m on the reinsurance with protection by way of retrocession for only 
$11m, they recovered the whole $35m as damages, two thirds of which they 
would have suffered even if the retrocession had been effective. The 
critical feature of the case which led to this result was that the brokers 
responsibility was found to extend beyond the placing of the retrocession 
to the entire transaction including the writing of the reinsurance itself: 
see paras 16-17 (Lord Lloyd), 40 (Lord Steyn). In particular, his duty was 
found to include reporting to the reinsurer the markets highly adverse 
assessment of the reinsured risk.

44.              It is right to say that at para 11 of his speech in Aneco
, Lord Lloyd seems to have regarded the principle laid down in SAAMCO as 
turning on ordinary principles of foreseeability and remoteness considered 
in leading cases such as Czarnikow v Koufos [1969] 1 AC 350. This may be 
why he regarded the advice category as representing the ordinary rule, 
and the information category as exceptional: see paras 12-13. But, with 
respect, foreseeability was assumed in SAAMCO. For that reason, and because 
categorisation is inevitably fact-sensitive, I doubt whether it is helpful 
to describe either of Lord Hoffmanns categories as normal or special. 
A valuer or a conveyancer, for example, will rarely supply more than a 
specific part of the material on which his clients decision is based. He 
is generally no more than a provider of what Lord Hoffmann called 
information. At the opposite end of the spectrum, an investment adviser 
advising a client whether to buy a particular stock, or a financial adviser 
advising whether to invest self-invested pension fund in an annuity are 
likely, in Lord Hoffmanns terminology, to be regarded as giving advice. 
Between these extremes, every case is likely to depend on the range of 
matters for which the defendant assumed responsibility and no more exact 
rule can be stated. In my judgment the decision in Aneco is not authority 
for any general proposition of law beyond the particular factual context of 
that case. The fullest statement of the law was that of Lord Millett at 
para 66. Lord Millett dissented on the facts, but the parties to this 
appeal agreed that, subject to one reservation, his summary of the law was 
correct. I think that they were right to do so. The reservation has no 
bearing on the present case. It is that Lord Millett confined his analysis 
of the law to the scope of the duty, and did not deal with the question of 
causation of loss. Normally, all the foreseeable loss flowing from the 
transaction will be treated as having been caused by the breach of duty, 
albeit that only that part of it which flows from the information being 
wrong will be recoverable as damages.

45.              As for the SAAMCO cap or restriction, which excludes 
loss that would still have been suffered even if the erroneous information 
had been true, that is simply a tool for giving effect to the distinction 
between (i) loss flowing from the fact that as a result of the defendants 
negligence the information was wrong and (ii) loss flowing from the 
decision to enter into the transaction at all. Mr Halpern submitted that 
the distinction is incoherent, because it does not achieve the professed 
object of the principles stated by Lord Hoffmann. Similar criticisms have 
been made by academic commentators, including Professor Stapleton and 
Professor Murdoch. It is of course true that the restriction does not 
systematically exclude loss arising from collateral risks with which the 
defendant was not concerned. Thus in the lead case in the SAAMCO 
litigation itself, York Montague overstated the value of the property by a 
factor of three, valuing at £15m a property worth £5m. Damages were limited 
to £10m, which exceeded the whole of the loss flowing from the transaction 
including the loss flowing from the fall in the market. The whole of that 
loss was accordingly awarded. In other cases, where the negligence of the 
valuer was less egregious, only part of the loss on the loan account was 
recoverable.

46.              Criticism of this result is in my opinion unjustified. The 
principle laid down in SAAMCO depends for its application on the award of 
loss which is within the scope of the defendants duty, not on the 
exclusion of loss which is outside it. In a simple case, they may amount to 
the same thing. It may, for example, be possible in a valuation case to 
strip out the effect of the fall in the market if that is the only 
extraneous source of loss. Even there, however, the exercise will be 
complicated by the common practice of lenders to allow a margin or 
cushion between the loan and the value of the property to allow for 
contingencies including some adverse market movement. Where the loss arises 
from a variety of commercial factors which it was for the claimant to 
identify and assess, it will commonly be difficult or impossible as well as 
unnecessary to quantify and strip out the financial impact of each one of 
them. In York Montagues case, the valuers duty had been to value the 
property at £5m instead of £15m. Given his duty to exercise reasonable care 
to get it right, £10m was the measure of the increased risk to which he 
exposed the lender by getting it wrong. That increased risk was the maximum 
measure of his own responsibility for what happened, and therefore provided 
the limit to what was recoverable by way of damages. It is fair to say that 
as a tool for relating the recoverable damages to the scope of the duty the 
SAAMCO cap or restriction may be mathematically imprecise. But mathematical 
precision is not always attainable in the law of damages. As Lord Hobhouse 
observed in Platform Home Loans Ltd v Oyston Shipways Ltd [2000] 2 AC 190, 
at 207, the principle is essentially a legal rule which is applied in a 
robust way without the need for fine tuning or a detailed investigation of 
causation.

Conveyancers

47.              Most cases about negligent valuation have specific 
features which are not necessarily characteristic of other professional 
negligence cases. But the principle stated in SAAMCO was expressed as a 
general principle of the law of damages. It has subsequently been applied, 
as we have seen, by the House of Lords to cases of information negligently 
provided by an insurance broker and by the Court of Appeal to negligent 
legal advice. However, much the most fertile area of development has been a 
body of case law concerning the liability of conveyancing solicitors for 
negligence in reporting on title or related matters to a prospective 
mortgage lender. Mr Halpern relies on these cases as qualifying the 
application of the principle. It is therefore necessary to say something 
about them.

48.              The background to most of the conveyancing cases was 
similar to that of the valuation cases. As a result of a steep fall in the 
residential property market in the early 1990s many mortgage lenders were 
left with non-performing loans for which the property no longer provided 
full security. Some of them sued solicitors who had negligently failed to 
report at the time of the conveyance on some matter which they said would 
have deterred them from entering into the transaction if they had known of 
it. In each case, the lender sought to recover the entire loss on the 
relevant loan account from the solicitor. The pathfinder was the Bristol 
and West Building Society, which brought 87 actions against solicitors on 
this basis. Eight of them were heard together by Chadwick J. Judgment was 
given on these cases under the title Bristol and West Building Society v 
Fancy & Jackson (a firm) [1997] 4 All ER 582 in July 1997, a few months 
after the decision in SAAMCO but before the important elucidations in 
Nykredit.

49.              Chadwick J found that in three of the eight cases the 
lender would have refused to proceed if the solicitor had complied with its 
duty to report some relevant fact. These were accordingly no transaction 
cases. He resolved them as follows:

    (1)       The first of the three cases, Fancy & Jackson, was
    straightforward. The solicitor completed the transaction without
    obtaining a search certificate to establish title, but the certificate,
    if it had been obtained, would have been clear. There was therefore no
    recoverable loss.

    (2)       In Steggles Palmer, the solicitors failed to report that the
    transaction was by way of sale and sub-sale under which a connected
    intermediate vendor made a profit of £7,000. If the lender had known
    this, it would have concluded that the borrower was dishonest and would
    have refused on principle to lend to him. The judge held the solicitors
    liable for the entire loss on the loan account, because the defendants
    should be responsible for the consequences of the society not being in
    the position to take the decision which it would have taken if the
    defendants had done what they should have done (p 622e-f).

    (3)       Colin Bishop was another case of back to back sale and
    sub-sale with an uplift of £25,000, about a third of the purchase
    price, but in this case there was no reason to think that the borrower
    was connected with the intermediate vendor. That would have made no
    difference to the lenders decision. They would still have walked away
    from the transaction because they had a strict policy of not lending
    where the proposed purchase was linked to a prior transaction, whether
    the parties were connected or not. Chadwick J had doubts about the
    objective rationality of the lenders policy, but he accepted that it
    existed and would have been applied (p 619a-d). It followed that the
    existence of linked transactions was just as fundamental to the lender
    in Colin Bishop as it was in Steggles Palmer. But it was not as
    fundamental to the Judge. He appears to have distinguished between the
    two cases because of the quality of the lenders reasons for walking
    away. In Steggles Palmer the lender would have refused to proceed
    because the borrower was an unacceptable counterparty, whereas in 
    Colin Bishop, objectively the problem need not have been fundamental
    because it could have been rectified by a further valuation (p 622g-j).
    The Judge therefore concluded that in Colin Bishop if the true value
    corresponded to the lenders valuation (a question which had yet to be
    determined), there would be no loss, whereas such a finding would not
    in his view have been relevant in Steggles Palmer.

50.              I respectfully doubt whether these are rational 
distinctions. In all three cases, the solicitors were on the face of it 
supplying specific information in accordance with the lenders standard 
reporting instructions. The lender would in due course take it into account 
in deciding whether and if so how much to lend, along with other important 
information for which the solicitors had no responsibility, such as the 
valuation of the property, the amount of the loan, and the borrowers 
capacity to service it. The solicitors had not assumed responsibility for 
identifying all the matters relevant to the lenders decision or for 
advising them whether to proceed. That was a matter for the lender, and 
would depend not just on the whole of the material before it but on its 
internal guidelines and lending policies and the judgment of individual 
loan officers. All of these cases therefore came within Lord Hoffmanns 
information category.

51.              Mr Halpern relied on the decision in Steggles Palmer for 
the proposition that nonetheless where the defendant ought to have reported 
some fact which was fundamental to the claimants decision whether to 
proceed, the whole loss flowing from the transaction was recoverable as 
such. I agree that that is what Chadwick J appears to have decided in 
Steggles Palmer, but I consider that he was wrong to do so. The facts of 
Steggles Palmer were no different in any legally relevant respect from 
those of Colin Bishop. The duty of the solicitors depended on their 
retainer, which was agreed before any breach of duty occurred and appears 
to have been in substantially similar terms in both cases. In both cases, 
it extended to the care with which the solicitor answered the questions in 
the lenders standard reporting instructions, but not to the decision 
whether to proceed with the transaction. It followed that the loss flowing 
from the decision to lend could not as such be within the scope of their 
duty. Chadwick Js approach was to make the measure of damages depend not 
on the scope of the duty but on the gravity of the particular breach and on 
his assessment of the objective quality of the reasons why the lender would 
have responded by refusing to proceed. In effect, he reverted in Steggles 
Palmer to the distinction between no transaction and successful 
transaction cases which had been rejected in SAAMCO. His observation that 
the lender had been deprived of the opportunity to make the decision that 
he would have made is only another way of saying that this was a no 
transaction case.

52.              For the same reason, I consider that the Court of Appeal 
was wrong to apply the reasoning in Steggles Palmer in Portman Building 
Society v Bevan Ashford (a firm) [2000] PNLR 344, where the facts were 
indistinguishable. Otton LJ, delivering the leading judgment, declined to 
ask himself whether the scope of the solicitors duty extended to the 
lenders decision or only to the material which the solicitor contributed 
to that decision, because in his view the distinction was irrelevant in a 
case where the facts withheld were sufficiently grave. He put the point in 
this way, at p 359:

       where a negligent solicitor fails to provide information which
       shows that the transaction is not viable or which tends to reveal an
       actual or potential fraud on the part of the borrowers, the lender
       is entitled to recover the whole of his loss. In other words, the
       whole of the loss suffered by the lender is within the scope of the
       solicitors duty and is properly recoverable.

This involves the same error as affected Chadwick Js analysis in Steggles 
Palmer, namely that the mere fact that the breach of duty caused the lender 
to proceed when he would otherwise have withdrawn was enough to make the 
solicitors legally responsible for the lenders decision and all its 
financial consequences. All no transaction cases have this 
characteristic, whether or not the fact withheld or misrepresented goes to 
the viability of the transaction or the honesty of the counterparty, 
because in all of them the fact withheld or misrepresented is ex hypothesi 
sufficiently fundamental to have caused the lender to walk away had he 
known the truth. It is right to add that in at least one of the three cases 
before the House of Lords in SAAMCO (the York Montague case) the 
information withheld went to the viability of the transaction, and that in 
Banque Keyser Ullmann v Skandia Insurance Co [1991] 2 AC 249, which was 
regarded in SAAMCO as an application of the same principle, the information 
withheld not only went to the viability of the transaction but would also 
have revealed the dishonesty of the counterparty. Yet it was not suggested 
in either case that these were relevant considerations.

The burden of proof

53.              The Court of Appeal considered that the burden of proving 
facts which engaged the SAAMCO principle lay upon the claimant. This is not 
a straightforward question, but in my judgment they were right about this. 
The legal burden of proving any averment of fact lies upon the person who 
is required to assert it as part of his case. In the ordinary course, this 
means that the claimant has the burden of pleading and proving his loss, 
whereas the defendant has the burden of proving facts (such as failure to 
mitigate) going to avoid or abate the consequent liability in damages. The 
practical effect of the principle formulated in SAAMCO in cases such as 
this is to limit the amount of the damages recoverable in respect of loss 
flowing from the claimants decision to enter into a transaction. But it is 
not a principle of assessment, let alone of avoidance or abatement. It is 
an essential part of the claimants case that he was owed a relevant duty. 
As Lord Hoffmann expressed it in SAAMCO, at p 220:

       The appearance of a cap is actually the result of the plaintiff
       having to satisfy two separate requirements: first, to prove that he
       has suffered loss, and, secondly, to establish that the loss fell
       within the scope of the duty he was owed.

Application to the present case

54.              The first question is whether BPE Solicitors assumed 
responsibility for Mr Gabriels decision to lend money to Mr Little. In my 
judgment, it is clear that they did not. Their instructions were to draw up 
the facility agreement and the charge, nothing more. Mr Spencer did not 
know and did not need to know what had passed between Mr Gabriel and Mr 
Little, except that they had agreed upon a loan of £200,000 secured by a 
charge on Building 428. He knew nothing about the nature of the proposed 
development, its likely cost, the financial capacity of Mr Little to fund 
it without Mr Gabriels loan or the value of the property in its developed 
or undeveloped state. Indeed, he does not even appear to have known of Mr 
Gabriels assumption about the use to be made of the loan moneys. He simply 
included in the draft facility agreement by oversight language which by an 
unhappy chance confirmed that assumption. The only ground on which the 
Deputy Judge held that BPE were responsible for the decision was that, 
applying the approach adopted in Bristol and West Building Society v Fancy 
& Jackson and Portman Building Society v Bevan Ashford, Mr Spencers 
breach of duty meant that Mr Gabriel was not able to know the true nature 
of the loan transaction into which he was entering (para 91). As in the 
two building society cases, this simply meant that this was a no 
transaction case in the discredited taxonomy of the Court of Appeal in 
SAAMCO.

55.              On the footing that BPE was not legally responsible for Mr 
Gabriels decision to lend the money, but only for confirming his 
assumption about one of a number of factors in his assessment of the 
project, the next question is what if any loss was attributable to that 
assumption being wrong. The answer is that if it had been right, Mr Gabriel 
would still have lost his money because the expenditure of £200,000 would 
not have enhanced the value of the property. The development would have 
been left incomplete, the loan unpaid and the property substantially 
worthless when it came to be sold into a depressed market under the 
chargees power of sale. None of the loss which Mr Gabriel suffered was 
within the scope of BPEs duty. None of it was loss against which BPE was 
duty bound to take reasonable care to protect him. It arose from commercial 
misjudgements which were no concern of theirs.

Contributory negligence

56.              In these circumstances, no question of contributory 
negligence arises.

Conclusion

57.              I would accordingly dismiss the appeal.