Hilary Term

[2017] UKSC 23

On appeal from: [2013] EWCA Civ 1658

 

 

 

JUDGMENT

 

 

Plevin (Respondent) v Paragon Personal Finance Limited (Appellant)

 

 

before

 

Lady Hale, Deputy President

Lord Clarke

Lord Sumption

Lord Carnwath

Lord Hodge

 

 

 

JUDGMENT GIVEN ON

 

 

29 March 2017

 

 

Heard on 6 February 2017

 

 

Appellant

PJ Kirby QC

Thomas Bell

(Instructed by Harrison Clark Rickerbys Solicitors)

 

Respondent

Robert Marven

Andrew Clark

(Instructed by Miller Gardner Solicitors)

 

 

LORD SUMPTION: (with whom Lady Hale, Lord Clarke and Lord Carnwath agree)

1.                   On 12 November 2014, this court gave judgment 
dismissing Paragons appeal and ordering them to pay Mrs Plevins costs in 
the Supreme Court [2014] UKSC 61. Those costs were subsequently assessed by 
Master OHare and Mrs Registrar di Mambro in judgments given by them on 5 
February 2015.

2.                   Costs in the Supreme Court were high, mainly because 
Mrs Plevins solicitors were acting under a conditional fee agreement 
(CFA), with after the event insurance (ATE). They were assessed at 
£751,463.84, including £31,378.92 for the solicitors success fee and 
£531,235 for the ATE insurance premium. It need hardly be said that these 
sums are wholly disproportionate to the relatively modest amount at stake, 
in the event just £4,500. This was a common feature of the costs regime 
introduced by the Access to Justice Act 1999, which ultimately led to its 
abrogation on the recommendation of Sir Rupert Jacksons Review of 
Litigation Costs (2010). Subject to transitional provisions, the 1999 costs 
regime was brought to an end with effect on 1 April 2013 by Part 2 of the 
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.

3.                   Rule 53 of the Supreme Court Rules 2009 provides for a 
party dissatisfied with an assessment of costs made at an oral hearing to 
apply for any question of principle arising from an assessment to be 
reviewed by a single Justice, who may refer the matter to a panel of 
Justices. Paragon applied for a review of the costs assessment on two 
grounds, both of which raise questions of principle. The first ground 
relates to the success fee. It is said that the CFA was made with the 
solicitors originally instructed by Mrs Plevin and was not validly assigned 
to the two firms who successively replaced them on the record. The second 
ground relates to both the success fee and the ATE premium. It is said that 
they were not recoverable, because they were payable under arrangements 
made by Mrs Plevin after the 2012 Act came into force. The application was 
referred to me as a single Justice. I referred it to the full panel which 
sat on the substantive appeal, because the second ground raised questions 
of some general importance. For the same reason, we are dealing with the 
matter by a formal judgment delivered in open court.

Assignments of the conditional fee agreement

4.                   Mrs Plevin entered into a CFA with her original 
solicitors, Miller Gardner, on 19 June 2008. Subsequently there were two 
technical changes of solicitor. They were technical because they both arose 
out of organisational changes within the same firm. In July 2009, the 
partners of Miller Gardner reconstituted themselves as an LLP. This was 
done by appointing administrators of the old partnership, who entered into 
an agreement with a new firm, Miller Gardner LLP, transferring specified 
assets to it. In April 2012, Miller Gardner LLP transferred its business to 
a limited company, Miller Gardner Ltd, under an agreement in similar terms. 
The point taken by Paragon is that on neither occasion was the CFA validly 
assigned to the new firm. There was therefore, they say, no effective 
retainer at the time when costs were incurred in the Supreme Court. The 
costs judges rejected this argument. I can deal with this point shortly, 
for in my view it has no merit and was rightly rejected.

5.                   It is common ground that the CFA was in principle 
assignable. Paragons argument is based on the terms to the two successive 
transfer agreements made between the successive Miller Gardner entities.

6.                   The operative clause of the 2009 transfer agreement 
was Clause 2.1, which transferred ten categories of asset to the new firm 
to the intent that the Buyer shall from the Transfer Date carry on the 
Business as a going concern. The only relevant category of assets for 
present purposes is the Work in Progress. This is defined in Clause 1.1 
as meaning all partly completed goods or services allocated by the Seller 
or the Administrators to the Contracts. Contracts means the contracts, 
instructions, orders and engagements placed with the Seller  by its 
clients insofar as they have not been fully performed by the Transfer 
Date. Paragons argument is that Work in Progress includes only work 
already done at the transfer date. It does not, they say, cover further 
work on the same matter done thereafter. If this were correct, it would 
mean that the only right of the successor firm was to bill the clients for 
work done before the transfer date, leaving them with no solicitor to act 
for them other than the defunct shell of the old firm. This plainly cannot 
have been intended. The point about work in progress is that it is in 
progress, and Clause 2.1 expressly transfers the work in progress to the 
intent that the Buyer shall from the Transfer Date carry on the Business as 
a going concern.

7.                   The relevant provisions of the 2012 transfer agreement 
are substantially the same, except that the words just quoted are absent. 
However, the intention that the practice should be carried on is equally 
plain.

8.                   It is right to add that even if the argument were 
sound, it would lead nowhere. Shortly after each transfer, on 30 July 2009 
and 30 April 2012, the new firm wrote to Mrs Plevin informing her about the 
change, referring to the CFA and saying that they would continue to 
represent you on the same terms and conditions as previously. Mrs Plevin 
plainly assented to that by continuing to instruct them.

Recoverability of the success fee

9.                   Section 27 of the Access to Justice Act 1999 amended 
the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 by inserting new sections 58 and 
58A. These authorised conditional fee agreements between litigants and 
their legal representatives, which might include provision for a success 
fee. Section 58A(6) provided that rules of court might provide for the 
success fee to be recoverable as costs. Section 29 provided that where ATE 
insurance was in place against the risk of incurring liability for costs, 
rules of court might provide for the premium to be recoverable as costs. 
Rules of court were subsequently made requiring both the success fee and 
the ATE premium to be included in the costs awarded to a party. At the 
relevant time the rules were contained in CPR Part 44. These arrangements 
were abrogated by the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 
2012 (LASPO). The Act amended the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990. 
Section 58A(6) of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 (as amended by 
section 44(4) of LASPO) now provided that a success fee may not be 
recoverable as costs. Section 58C(1) (as amended by section 46(1) of LASPO) 
made similar provision for ATE premiums, except that their recovery in 
clinical negligence actions might be authorised by regulations. These 
changes came into force on 1 April 2013, subject to transitional 
provisions. It is on the transitional provisions that the present issue 
turns.

10.              The CFA originally agreed with Miller Gardner in 2008 
covered all proceedings up to and including the trial, and all steps taken 
to seek leave to appeal from an adverse result at the trial. On 8 August 
2013, the Court of Appeal having given leave to appeal from the dismissal 
of Mrs Plevins case by the trial judge, she and Miller Gardner entered 
into a deed of variation extending the CFA to cover the conduct of the 
appeal. On 3 January 2014, the Court of Appeal having allowed the appeal 
and given leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, there was a further deed of 
variation extending the CFA to cover the appeal to the Supreme Court.

11.              LASPO section 44(6) provides that the amendment of the 
1990 Act to prevent the inclusion of a success fee in the assessed costs

       does not prevent a costs order including provision in relation to a
       success fee payable by a person (P) under a conditional fee
       agreement entered into before the day on which that subsection comes
       into force (the commencement day) if



           (a)      the agreement was entered into specifically for the
           purposes of the provision to P of advocacy or litigation
           services in connection with the matter that is the subject of
           the proceedings in which the costs order is made, or

           (b)       advocacy or litigation services were provided to P
           under the agreement in connection with that matter before the
           commencement day.

12.              Paragons case is that in relation to the proceedings in 
the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court the variations of August 2013 and 
January 2014 were new agreements entered into after 1 April 2013 for the 
provision of litigation services after that date. They were not therefore 
covered by the transitional provisions of section 44(6) of LASPO. This is 
in my judgment a bad point. The matter that is the subject of the 
proceedings means the underlying dispute. The two deeds of variation 
provided for litigation services in relation to the same underlying dispute 
as the original CFA, albeit at the appellate stages.

13.              It follows that unless the effect of the deeds was to 
discharge the original CFA and replace it with new agreements made at the 
dates of the deeds, the success fee may properly be included in the costs 
order. Whether a variation amends the principal agreement or discharges and 
replaces it depends on the intention of the parties. To establish a 
discharge and replacement, there should have been made manifest the 
intention in any event of a complete extinction of the first and formal 
contract, and not merely the desire of an alteration, however sweeping, in 
terms which are still subsisting: Morris v Baron & Co [1918] AC 1, 19 
(Viscount Haldane). At the time when the two deeds of variation were 
executed, the CFA still subsisted (there were outstanding proceedings 
relating to the costs, for example). Both deeds are expressly agreed to be 
a variation of the CFA, leaving all of its terms unchanged except for the 
addition to the coverage of a further stage of the litigation and a change 
in the amount of the success fee. While the description given to the 
transactions by the parties would not necessarily be conclusive if the 
alleged variation substituted a different subject-matter, that cannot be 
said of either of the deeds of variation.

14.              There was a faint suggestion that the deeds of variation 
were an artificial device designed to avoid the operation of section 
44(4) of LASPO. There is nothing in this point. The deeds of variation were 
not a sham. An amendment of the existing CFA is a natural way of dealing 
with further proceedings in the same action. They therefore take effect 
according to their terms.

Recoverability of the ATE premium

15.              I turn therefore to the corresponding issue about the ATE 
premium. Before the costs judges it was conceded that the ATE premium was 
recoverable as part of the costs. Because of the novelty and importance of 
the issue, we gave Paragon leave to resile from this concession on terms 
that they should pay the costs of the issue in any event, and directed an 
oral hearing limited to that issue.

16.              The ATE policy was originally concluded on 29 October 
2008. It covered legal expenses and liability for the other sides costs up 
to and including the trial period, which meant the period fixed by the 
court for the trial. It was topped up for the appeal to the Court of 
Appeal and again for the appeal to the Supreme Court. The top-ups did not 
give rise to fresh contracts. They were true amendments to the policy which 
continued in effect subject to the same terms as amended. But on both 
occasions the amendment was made after LASPO came into force. By mistake, 
the wrong standard terms were incorporated into the policy, but the 
insurers have agreed to be bound by Clause 4 of the insuring clause in the 
form which ought to have been incorporated. This provided:

       4.       We will indemnify you against your liability, if any, to
       pay your insurance premium for your policy if you win and cannot
       recover the premium in full or in part.

We were told that this is a common, although not invariable provision in 
ATE policies issued to non-business litigants. Its effect is that if the 
premium is not included in the assessed costs awarded to the insured, the 
loss falls on the insurers and not on the insured. The significance of the 
point as far as the insured is concerned is that whichever of them is bound 
to meets the cost of the ATE premium, if it is not recoverable from the 
losing party ATE will not be a viable method of funding.

17.              The difficulty arises out of the fact that the language of 
the transitional provisions relating to ATE premiums is different from that 
of the corresponding provisions relating to success fees. Section 46(3) 
provides:

       The amendments made by this section do not apply in relation to a
       costs order made in favour of a party to proceedings who took out a
       costs insurance policy in relation to the proceedings before the day
       on which this section comes into force.

Whereas section 44(6) of LASPO refers in the context of success fees to an 
agreement  in connection with the matter that is the subject of the 
proceedings, section 46(3) refers to an insurance policy in relation to 
the proceedings. In other words, the requisite link is with the 
proceedings and not with the subject matter of the proceedings. Before 1 
April 2013, there was an ATE policy in place, but it was not a policy in 
relation to the appeal to the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court. 
Accordingly, the critical question is whether the two appeals constituted 
part of the same proceedings as the trial (as Mrs Plevin argues) or 
distinct proceedings (as Paragon argues). If the appeals constituted 
distinct proceedings, then there was no policy in place at the commencement 
date with the characteristic required by the Act, namely that it related to 
the appeals. That, in a nutshell, is Paragons argument.

18.             It is clear that for some purposes the trial and successive 
appeals do constitute distinct proceedings. In particular they are distinct 
proceedings for the purpose of awarding and assessing costs: see Masson, 
Templier & Co v De Fries [1910] 1 KB 535, 538-539 (Vaughan Williams LJ); 
Wright v Bennett [1948] 1 KB 601; Goldstein v Conley [2002] 1 WLR 281, at 
paras 79 (Clarke LJ), 107 (Sir Anthony Evans). The authorities were 
helpfully reviewed by Rix LJ in Hawksford Trustees Jersey Ltd v Stella 
Global UK Ltd (No 2) [2012] 1 WLR 3581. In that case, the Court of Appeal 
held that for the purpose of section 29 of the Access to Justice Act 1999, 
the costs incurred in respect of an ATE premium were recoverable only in 
the proceedings to which the policy related, ie as part of the costs of the 
trial if the policy related only to the trial, and not as part of the costs 
of the appeal. In Gabriel v BPE Solicitors [2015] AC 1663, para 16, this 
court applied the same principle when holding that a trustee in bankruptcy, 
by prosecuting an appeal to the Supreme Court, did not expose himself to 
liability for the costs of the distinct proceedings conducted by the 
bankrupt at trial or on appeal to the Court of Appeal.

19.             However, proceedings is not a defined term in the 
legislation, nor is it a term of art under the general law. Its meaning 
must depend on its statutory context and on the underlying purpose of the 
provision in which it appears, so far as that can be discerned. The context 
in which the word appears in section 46(3) of LASPO is different and so, in 
my judgment, is the result.

20.             The starting point is that as a matter of ordinary language 
one would say that the proceedings were brought in support of a claim, and 
were not over until the courts had disposed of that claim one way or the 
other at whatever level of the judicial hierarchy. The word is synonymous 
with an action. In the cases cited above, relating to the awarding or 
assessment of costs, the ordinary meaning is displaced because a distinct 
order for costs must be made in respect of the trial and each subsequent 
appeal, and a separate assessment made of the costs specifically relating 
to each stage. They therefore fall to be treated for those purposes as 
separate proceedings. The present issue, however, turns on a different 
point. The question posed by section 46(3) of LASPO is whether the fact of 
having had an ATE policy relating to the trial before the commencement date 
is enough to entitle the insured to continue to use the 1999 costs regime 
for subsequent stages of the proceedings under top-up amendments made after 
that date. The fact that costs are separately awarded and assessed in 
relation to each stage does not assist in answering that question.

21.             The purpose of the transitional provisions of LASPO, in 
relation to both success fees and ATE premiums, is to preserve vested 
rights and expectations arising from the previous law. That purpose would 
be defeated by a rigid distinction between different stages of the same 
litigation. It may or may not be reasonable to expect an insured party who 
fails at trial to abandon the fight for want of funding. That will depend 
mainly on the merits of the appeal. But an insured claimant who succeeds at 
trial and becomes the respondent to an appeal is locked into the 
litigation. Unless he is prepared to forego the fruits of his judgment, 
which by definition represents his rights unless and until it is set aside, 
he has no option but to defend the appeal. The topping-up of his ATE policy 
to cover the appeal is in reality part of the cost of defending what he has 
won by virtue of being funded under the original policy. The effect, if the 
top-up premium is not recoverable, would be retrospectively to alter the 
balance of risks on the basis of which the litigation was begun.

22.             The only substantial argument against this analysis arises 
out of the difference between the expression the matter that is the 
subject of the proceedings in section 44(6) of LASPO, and the 
proceedings in 46(3). In the ordinary course, there is a presumption that 
the same expression used in different provisions of a statute has the same 
meaning wherever it appears. There is also a presumption that differences 
in the language used to describe comparable concepts are intended to 
reflect differences in meaning. But the latter presumption is generally 
weaker than the former, because the use of the same expression is more 
likely to be deliberate. It will readily be displaced if there is another 
plausible explanation of the difference. Section 44(6) of LASPO is 
concerned with the terms on which a solicitor is employed to provide 
advocacy or litigation services. The subject of any solicitors retainer is 
ordinarily referred to as a matter. The word is, for example, 
persistently used throughout the Code of Conduct published by the 
Solicitors Regulation Authority. It is used in section 44(6) because the 
solicitor will commonly have been retained to provide a wider range of 
services in relation to a matter than just advocacy and litigation 
services. In those circumstances, the subsection had to be drafted so as to 
require the CFA to be limited to the provision of advocacy and litigation 
services. The word matter is also used, for a rather similar reason, in 
section 47, which repeals section 30 of the Access to Justice Act 1999 
relating to the uplift chargeable by associations and other bodies who 
may have undertaken to meet a potential liability of members or other 
persons to pay the other sides costs in litigation. Section 47(2) is a 
saving for cases where before the commencement date the body in question 
has given such an undertaking in respect of costs relating to the matter 
which is the subject of the proceedings. The undertaking and the 
relationship between the body and the beneficiary of the undertaking may be 
wider than just the conduct of the litigation. By comparison, section 46(3) 
relates to costs insurance policies which by their nature are concerned 
with specific litigation. I do not regard the difference of language as 
being any more significant than that. In particular, Counsel was unable to 
suggest any rational reason why the legislature should have wished to limit 
the transitional provisions in section 46(3) to a particular stage in the 
litigation, while extending the transitional provisions in sections 44(6) 
and 47(2) to arrangements relating to the underlying matter. Neither can 
I.

23.              In my opinion, if there has been ATE cover in respect of 
liability for the costs of the trial, the insured is entitled after the 
commencement date to take out further ATE cover for appeals and to include 
them in his assessable costs under the 1999 costs regime.

Conclusion

24.              For these reasons, I would confirm the assessment of the 
costs judges.

LORD HODGE: (dissenting)

25.              I agree with Lord Sumption on the question of the 
assignments of the CFAs. But I regret that I find myself in disagreement on 
the interpretation of the transitional provisions in sections 44(6) and 
46(3) of LASPO.

26.              The interpretation of the word proceedings formed a 
significant part of the legal debate before this court. I agree that there 
is no good policy reason for Parliament to have introduced differing 
transitional protection for CFAs on the one hand and cost insurance 
policies on the other. Where I differ is that I interpret the transitional 
provisions as protecting only the pre-existing contractual rights of the 
party to the proceedings and her expectation to recover the success fee, 
for which she and her lawyers had contracted before the commencement day, 
from the losing party. I do not construe the provisions as protecting any 
wider expectation of how the litigation may be funded thereafter. Thus the 
subsequent amendments of the CFA to cover the appellate proceedings and the 
top ups of the costs insurance policy did not, in my view, fall within the 
transitional provisions. I set out my reasons below.

27.              When Parliament enacted LASPO it removed the right of a 
successful party to recover from the unsuccessful party by way of a costs 
order both a success fee payable under a conditional fee agreement (section 
44) and also (subject to an exception with which this appeal is not 
concerned) all or part of the premium of the successful partys costs 
insurance policy (section 46).

28.              But in each case Parliament included a transitional 
provision to protect the party who had already entered into such funding 
arrangements before those sections came into force on 1 April 2013.

29.              In relation to CFAs section 44(4) of LASPO amended section 
58 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 (the 1990 Act) to prohibit 
the costs order from providing for the recovery of a success fee. Section 
44(6) of LASPO provided:

       The amendment made by subsection (4) does not prevent a costs order
       including provision in relation to a success fee payable by a person
       (P) under a conditional fee agreement entered into before the day
       on which that subsection comes into force (the commencement day)
       if -

           (a)       the agreement was entered into specifically for the
           purposes of the provision to P of advocacy or litigation
           services in connection with the matter that is the subject of
           the proceedings in which the costs order is made, or

           (b)       advocacy or litigation services were provided to P
           under the agreement in connection with that matter before the
           commencement day. (emphasis added)

30.              It is clear that this provision requires there to be a CFA 
in existence before the commencement day and that the success fee was 
payable by P under that CFA, whether it related specifically to the matter 
(subsection (6)(a)) or was sufficiently wide as to cover that matter 
(subsection (6)(b)). A success fee payable under a CFA entered into after 1 
April 2013 is not recoverable. It seems to me that this transitional 
provision was designed to preserve both the pre-existing contractual rights 
of the parties to the CFA and their expectation that there would be an 
entitlement to recover the success fee arising under that contract from the 
unsuccessful party through a costs order. Thus, if the pre-existing CFA 
covered a dispute through several levels of the court hierarchy, costs 
orders could allow the recovery of the success fee at each level so 
covered. If not, the costs orders would not.

31.              Two sections further on in LASPO, section 46(1) introduced 
into the 1990 Act the new section 58C prohibiting the recovery by a costs 
order of the premium of a costs insurance policy. Section 46(3) provided:

       The amendments made by this section do not apply in relation to a
       costs order made in favour of a party to proceedings who took out a
       costs insurance policy in relation to the proceedings before the day 
       on which this section comes into force. (emphasis added)

32.              It is clear that this provision required there to be a 
costs insurance policy in place before the commencement day. Again, the 
subsection protects the contractual rights of the parties and their 
expectation of an entitlement to recover the policy premium through a costs 
order. But Parliament chose to use different words to define the scope of 
the protection given to the expectations associated with the relevant 
contract. In this subsection it is not a policy covering the matter which 
is the subject of the proceedings but a policy in relation to the 
proceedings that is exempted from the new regime. Does that difference 
matter or are both transitional provisions seeking to achieve the same 
result?

33.              I can detect no good reason why the two transitional 
provisions should have a different effect and Counsel suggested none. For 
the following three reasons I have come to the view that each is designed 
to protect the expectations of a party arising out of her contractual 
arrangements for the funding assistance as they existed before the 
commencement day.

34.              First, the protection which section 44(6) gives to the 
recovery of success fees applies only in so far as the pre-existing CFA 
covers the appeal proceedings and not otherwise. Thus a claimant whose CFA 
covered only the proceedings at first instance could not rely on the 
transitional provision if she or he had to enter into a new CFA for an 
appeal, for example if she or he had to instruct different legal 
representatives. To my mind the transitional protection cannot depend on 
whether the contract for a success fee at later stages of the action is 
achieved by varying or assigning the original CFA on the one hand or 
entering into a new CFA on the other. If Parliament had wanted to allow the 
litigant to say Ive started so Ill finish, it would not have made the 
transitional protection depend upon the success fee being payable under the 
pre-existing contract.

35.              Secondly, the protection for the costs insurance policy 
premium in section 46(3) covers the party who has timeously taken out a 
costs insurance policy in relation to the proceedings. This wording 
focuses on the scope of the pre-existing costs insurance policy. It is 
common ground that the word proceedings can bear a broad or a narrow 
interpretation, covering either the proceedings at one level of the court 
hierarchy (as in Masson Templier & Co v De Fries [1910] 1 KB 535, Wright v 
Bennett [1948] 1 KB 601, Hawksford Trustees Jersey Ltd v Stella Global UK 
Ltd (No 2) [2012] 1 WLR 3581 and Gabriel v BPE Solicitors [2015] UKSC 39) 
or the proceedings in the case at all levels of the hierarchy. In applying 
the subsection the question to be asked is: what are the proceedings in 
relation to which the party has obtained a costs insurance policy?

36.              Thirdly, in my view the public policy expressed in each of 
the transitional sub-sections can be reconciled if the words the 
proceedings in section 46(3) are construed as referring to such 
proceedings as were covered by the pre-commencement day insurance policy. 
In other words, the question posed in the previous paragraph is answered by 
reading the pre-existing insurance policy. Again the transitional 
protection does not depend on whether, as in Mrs Plevins case, the policy 
was varied to cover the further stages of the litigation or a new costs 
insurance policy was entered into to cover those stages. Each transitional 
provision protects the pre-existing contractual rights and the pre-existing 
expectations, arising from those rights, as to recovery from the losing 
party.

37.              This interpretation would not cause concern if the 
claimant had lost at first instance and had herself or himself to initiate 
an appeal. The claimant who had lost and wished to appeal would be in a 
position similar to anyone else who had not put in place funding 
arrangements for a litigation before the commencement date and had to 
assert a claim under the post-LASPO costs regime. But it is undoubted that 
an individual claimant, who wins at first instance and must thereafter 
defend the judgment in her or his favour when the defendant appeals, would 
be in an unenviable position on this approach. Having commenced litigation 
with the security of a CFA and a costs insurance policy, the claimant could 
find herself or himself having to defend the judgment without the benefit 
of the costs insurance policy:

       They have tied me to a stake; I cannot fly. But, bear-like, I must
       fight the course. (Macbeth Act 5, 7, 1-2)

I therefore acknowledge the force of the view that transitional provisions 
which covered the whole of the litigation would be sensible. My difficulty 
is in seeing that intention in the words which Parliament has used.

38.              I would have allowed the appeal on this ground.